---
layout: article
volume: Volume 38, June 2024
images: "assets/articles/mackay/img/"
title: "Exploring the IAC as Terminal Cadence: Melodic Deferral and Cadential Function in Classical Sonata-Form Movements"
author: "James S. MacKay"
abstract: "In a few Classical era works, an entire composition, or a large section
thereof, ends with an imperfect authentic cadence (IAC), completing the
*harmonic* motion back to the tonic, but deferring *melodic* closure
until later. This study will examine this technique in selected works by
Muzio Clementi (Opus 34/2), Joseph Haydn (&quot;Rider&quot; Quartet)
and Ludwig van Beethoven (Opus 110), demonstrating how such closing
gestures give the impression of full completion despite the absence of a
literal PAC. In sonata movements, if a subordinate theme concludes with
an IAC, this formal unit fuses subordinate theme and codetta functions,
which I call Subordinate Theme→ Codetta, analogous to Main
Theme/Transition formal fusion posited by William Caplin. If an entire
movement ends thus, subsequent movements must provide the missing
melodic completion---otherwise, we have what Charles Rosen terms a
&quot;Romantic Fragment&quot;: a composition that is literally
complete, but syntactically and rhetorically inconclusive."
footnote_1: "Cf. Caplin (1998, 97); Burstein (2020, 38); Hepokoski and Darcy (2006, 169)."
footnote_2: "Richards (2012, 218--219), like the authors cited above, permits the IAC as the subordinate theme's concluding cadence as an infrequent alternative to the PAC."
footnote_3: "The arrow signifies one formal unit &quot;becoming&quot; another: see Schmalfeldt (2011, 38)."
footnote_4: "On a related note, Robert Gjerdingen's (2017) schema theory discusses many historic cadence types from the Renaissance and Baroque eras, along with their use and adaptation by mid-eighteenth-century composers."
footnote_5: "MacKay (2017, 1) proposes such an exclusion on historic grounds."
footnote_6: "Nicholas Marston (2001, 143), in a review of Caplin's *Classical Form*, was the first author to use this term, later taken up by multiple authors in reference to the revival of *Formenlehre* by Caplin, Schmalfeldt, and others."
footnote_7: "Earlier authors, e.g., Green (1979, 13), have a broader definition, allowing V^6^--I and vii^o6^--I progressions as IACs. This article follows Caplin's stricter criteria."
footnote_8: "Cf. Gjerdingen (2007, 139--41)."
footnote_9: "Defined in Schmalfeldt 1992, 2."
footnote_10: "This technique often occurs at the phrase level as well; e.g., the main theme of Beethoven's Sonata in C major, Opus 2 no. 3, featuring a second phrase that terminates with an IAC, followed by a &quot;one more time&quot; reprise that ends conclusively with a PAC."
footnote_11: "Caplin (1998, 270, n.10) labels the IAC of m. 54 as the *end* of the subordinate theme, implicitly reading the tonic arrival of m. 28 (or 37?) as this theme's onset. This reading is contrary to previous authors, including Grave and Grave (2006, 298), Keller (1986, 283), Landon (1976, Vol. 3, 480), and Barrett-Ayres (1974, 206). Hepokoski and Darcy (2006, 169) do not discuss this movement, though it fits their discussion of the C-space taking on some responsibilities of cadential articulation."
footnote_12: "On &quot;popular style&quot; in closing zones, see Miyake (2009, 34) and Rosen (1998a, 327--350)."
footnote_13: "If one labels m. 58 as the beginning of the codetta---Donald Francis Tovey (1998, 190) calls it a &quot;cadence theme&quot;---the analytical result for mm. 50--65 (Subordinate Theme→Codetta fused function) remains unchanged."
footnote_14: "Larsen discusses this type of exposition as illustrating one of many &quot;sonata form problems&quot; (Graue 2013, 9-10). Caplin and Martin (2016, 5--7) label such a segment as Transition/Subordinate Theme, suggesting a fusion of middle and ending formal roles. Hepokoski and Darcy (2006, 53) invoke Schmalfeldt's &quot;becoming&quot; rather than formal fusion, labeling this central unit as TR→FS (Transition→*Fortspinnung*)."
footnote_15: "Schmalfeldt (2011, 67) describes this reinterpretation as retransition→recapitulation, which focuses on the specific formal joint that the composer reinterprets."
footnote_16: "This cadence is a &quot;covered PAC,&quot; described in Zhang (2022, 6--7). Yust (2016) presents a related case (Beethoven, op. 59, no. 2, first movement)."
footnote_17: "The formal design of this part of the exposition corresponds to the &quot;Elaboration Section&quot; described in Larsen (1978/2013, 9--10), &quot;Continuous Exposition,&quot; subtype 1, from Hepokoski and Darcy (2006, 52--60), and Transition/Subordinate Theme fusion, discussed in Caplin (1998, 203)."
footnote_18: "Caplin (2018, 4) posits &quot;a lack of cadential closure for thematic units&quot; as a hallmark of early Romantic style. A later passage from Schumann's *Carnaval*, discussed in Caplin (2018, 15), provides a strategy similar to Beethoven's op. 110: a cover tone (^5) obscures an expected PAC at the end of a formal unit."
footnote_19: "Gjerdingen (2007, 139--76) summarizes this earlier concept of cadence."
---

<section markdown="1">
<h2>Introduction</h2>

A passage from Ludwig van Beethoven's *Hammerklavier* Sonata, op. 106,
first movement (marking the end of Subordinate Theme I) illustrates an
intriguing quandary as to the nature of formal closure in the Classical
era ([Example 1](#ex-1)):

{% include center_column_img.html src='assets/articles/mackay/img/ex_1.png' img_size='100' fig_num='1' fig_caption='Beethoven, Sonata in B<span class=\'music-font\'>&#x266D;</span> major, op. 106, first movement, mm. 96-100.'%}



Contrary to his usual practice, Beethoven uses the melodically
inconclusive IAC in a formal location where the full closure of a PAC
was normally expected. Certainly, recent authors on sonata form (William
E. Caplin, L. Poundie Burstein, James Hepokoski and Warren Darcy) view
an IAC at a sonata exposition's final cadence to be an exceedingly rare
(albeit not completely non-existent) option in the Classical period.{% include footnote.html footnote_number='1' footnote_text=page.footnote_1%}

The following study explores this rare formal decision: Classical-era
subordinate themes that end with what syntactically appears to be an
IAC. When such cadences occur at formal junctures where full closure is
paramount, the composer may defer melodic closure until a later beat,
which Mark Richards (2010, 35--39) terms a "separated cadence."{% include footnote.html footnote_number='2' footnote_text=page.footnote_2%} As
an extension of Richards' concept, this study examines this technique in
selected works by Muzio Clementi, Joseph Haydn, and Ludwig van
Beethoven, demonstrating how terminal gestures at the end of a sonata
exposition in which an apparent IAC substitutes for an expected PAC can
nonetheless ultimately create full closure. In such cases, rather than
ending forthrightly with the moment of harmonic completion (the goal
tone in the bass that signals the apparent IAC), the section achieves
its goal in a later measure when the melodic line reaches <span style="font-family: music;">&#xEF00;</span>, thus
creating an IAC→PAC cadential complex, following Janet Schmalfeldt's
concept of "becoming" (2011). Subordinate themes that end in this manner
may fuse with the ensuing codetta (closing section) into a single formal
unit, which, *pace* Schmalfeldt, will be described in this study as
subordinate theme→codetta.{% include footnote.html footnote_number='3' footnote_text=page.footnote_3%}

As a counter-example, the final section of this study will examine a
late work by Beethoven, his Sonata in A<span style="font-family: music;">&#x266D;</span> major, op. 110 (1821), to
illustrate a more flexible aesthetic of cadential finality. In this
work's opening movement, an IAC not only marks the end of the
exposition, but (uniquely for Beethoven) also returns in the coda as the
movement's final musical event. At this stage, the IAC takes on the
status of a terminal cadence, despite its melodic inconclusiveness. Such
an ending creates a poetic blend of finality and open-endedness that
would soon thereafter appeal to the sensibilities of the Romantic
generation of composers.

<h2>The IAC and Formal Closure: A Historical Viewpoint</h2>

The renewed interest in a *Formenlehre* approach to musical structure in
recent decades, initiated by Caplin's *Classical Form*, and further
pursued by Hepokoski and Darcy's *Elements of Sonata Theory*, has
elicited a rethinking of many fundamentals of syntax. Since closure is a
vital component of formal articulation, the concept of cadence has
undergone a thorough reexamination. Consequently, the proliferation of
cadence types that amassed during the nineteenth and twentieth centuries
has been called into question by various authors. Burstein (2015)
remarks upon the "analytical fiction" of the half cadence, while
Caplin's theory of formal functions denies many hallowed cadence types
from having formal significance, such as the plagal cadence, considered
post-cadential in Caplin (1998, 43--45), and the deceptive cadence,
described in Caplin (1998, 29) as a specific category of cadential
evasion.{% include footnote.html footnote_number='4' footnote_text=page.footnote_4%} Under some circumstances, the imperfect authentic cadence
could arguably be included in this rethinking as well.{% include footnote.html footnote_number='5' footnote_text=page.footnote_5%}

The IAC, a closure type whose status was in flux during the eighteenth
century, provides an intriguing set of challenges in the analysis of
mid-to-late-eighteenth-century music. In the Classical period, as
explored in the New *Formenlehre* of Caplin and others,{% include footnote.html footnote_number='6' footnote_text=page.footnote_6%} the IAC
typically serves as a middle event rather than a concluding one: its
combination (per Caplin 1998, 27) of full harmonic closure (V-I in root
position) and melodic open-endedness (concluding on <span style="font-family: music;">&#xEF02;</span> or <span style="font-family: music;">&#xEF04;</span>) makes it
highly appropriate for such an intermediate role.{% include footnote.html footnote_number='7' footnote_text=page.footnote_7%} The history of the
IAC partially explains its flexible use: in the Renaissance-Baroque
understanding of cadence, such a close was non-cadential, since one of
the structural voices did not terminate on the local melodic goal. This
type of closure was categorized as one of many means of "evading the
cadence" ("fuggir la cadenza," per Gioseffo Zarlino), from the 1500s
until the mid-eighteenth century.{% include footnote.html footnote_number='8' footnote_text=page.footnote_8%} This earlier theoretical
conception of cadence was still fundamental to the musical training of
Joseph Haydn (by Georg Reutter the Younger) and Wolfgang Amadeus Mozart
(by his father Leopold), despite a gradual shift in musical practice
during the pre-Classical era. As noted in Hepokoski (2021, 10--11),
shifting historical concepts of cadence can impact our conception of
cadential strength and classification.

Despite this historic precedent, the use of the IAC at a place where
full closure would be *pro forma* is a plausible (if rare) musical
option from about 1750 onward---Burstein (2020, 38) illustrates such a
cadence in the final measure of Georg Benda's Keyboard Sonata no. 1 in
B<span style="font-family: music;">&#x266D;</span> major, first movement, written in 1757. As such, the cadential
potential of the IAC is considerably more varied and nuanced than is
generally acknowledged. Xieyi (Abby) Zhang (2022, 191) discusses, among
other possibilities, the standard IAC, which effects convincing (if not
melodically complete) closure at a phrase ending; the deceptive IAC that
necessitates a "one more time" reprise of the phrase{% include footnote.html footnote_number='9' footnote_text=page.footnote_9%}; and the
covered perfect authentic cadence (PAC), where the composer overwrites
the melodic ending on the local tonic by superimposing a less conclusive
scale degree above it. After illustrating each of these possibilities,
Zhang (2022, 197) acknowledges that the differences between these IAC
categories "are not always as clearly drawn," with a resultant impact on
the listener\'s perception of such cadences' strength or degree of
finality. The "separated cadence" described in Richards (2010, 35-39) is
an added musical wrinkle, in which a seeming IAC on the musical surface
can serve retrospectively as full closure (i.e., as a *de facto* PAC)
once its melodic process is complete. We will now explore this concept
in depth.
<section>

<section markdown="1">
<h2>Melodic Deferral and Cadential Finality</h2>

Though a forthright musical articulation of formal boundaries with
cadences typifies the Classical era, not all Classical cadences rely
upon an exact coincidence of harmonic and melodic completion. With the
half cadence (HC) especially, melodic continuation often persists long
beyond the actual point of harmonic arrival, functioning as filler
material to add suspense to the cadential moment, as discussed in
Burstein (2015, 86--90). Classical composers often proceed similarly
with the IAC, creating a brief feeling of openness, later made right by
a melodic turn to the local tonic to achieve closure.

The concept of melodic deferral at authentic cadences can be illustrated
with a common Classical gesture: the cadence with appoggiatura,
featuring a "sighing motif" consisting of <span style="font-family: music;">&#xEF01;</span>--<span style="font-family: music;">&#xEF00;</span> or <span style="font-family: music;">&#xEF06;</span>--<span style="font-family: music;">&#xEF07;</span>, over a
V--I harmonic progression. A vestigial *Galant* device, this artful
withholding of the tonic in the melody until an unaccented beat is
common in the Classical period. As Caplin (2004, 77) describes this
well-known device: "frequently, the sense of melodic closure for the
thematic unit occurs somewhat after the final cadential harmony arrives,
usually as a result of suspension resolutions or some further
arpeggiation of the tones of the final harmony." [Example 2](#ex-2) presents a representative use of this device from
Beethoven's Sonata in E<span style="font-family: music;">&#x266D;</span> major, op. 7, second movement. Here, the
melodic delay cleverly integrates the cadence into the theme's motivic
content: the appoggiatura that delays the melodic onset of the tonic
arises inevitably from the two-note sighing motifs earlier in the
phrase. Such phrase-ending moments, where the composer delays melodic
completion at a potential cadence contains within it the seeds of
Richards' "separated cadence," acknowledging the complete finality of
such a closure type, despite its melodic deferral.

{% include center_column_img.html src='assets/articles/mackay/img/ex_2.png' img_size='100' fig_num='2' fig_caption='Beethoven, Sonata in E<span class=\'music-font\'>b</span> major, op. 7, second movement, mm. 3--8.'%}

Though Caplin seems to equate melodic delaying through suspensions and
melodic delaying through tonic arpeggiation, the latter technique is
more provocative analytically, creating a cadential quandary that
warrants further consideration. According to Heinrich Christoph Koch's
concept of *Überhang* (overhang), the note of the tonic chord that
coincides with the phrase's harmonic completion is the primary goal
tone, and the subsequent melodic descent is decorative (see Koch 1983
\[1793\], 22). When this device occurs at a thematic ending, it subtly
undercuts the finality of the cadential effect, opening two possible
analytic perspectives: an IAC, following Koch, in which the melodic
completion to the tonic serves a decorative purpose; or a separated PAC,
after Richards, where the late-arriving tonic note in the melody links
with the prior harmonic completion.

The main theme of Haydn's Sonata in E major, Hob. XVI: 31, first
movement, aptly illustrates this melodic device, and the cadential
ambiguity that results from it ([Example 3](#ex-3)). Following
a four-measure presentation phrase, mm. 5--8 form a
continuation→cadential phrase, comprising a two-measure cadential
segment stated twice. The first cadential statement ends in m. 6 with an
apparent IAC (the melody terminates on <span style="font-family: music;">&#xEF02;</span>), but no cadential status is
inferred, since this progression lies at the midpoint of the phrase.
Such progressions, which feature the harmonic content of a cadential
progression in the "wrong" form-functional location, exemplify cadences
"of limited scope" (Caplin 2004, 86--89). This particular progression
exemplifies the "deceptive IAC" discussed in Zhang (2022, 194-196),
whose melodic incompletion leads to a "one more time" repeat of the
cadential module, similar to (harmonically) deceptive cadences such as
V--vi.{% include footnote.html footnote_number='10' footnote_text=page.footnote_10%}

The immediate repetition of this two-measure phrase member likewise
reaches <span style="font-family: music;">&#xEF02;</span> as its melodic goal (m. 8, beat 3), thus at first seeming to
form (once again) an IAC. Haydn quickly descends to the tonic, however,
to create full melodic closure, if belatedly. This brief *Überhang*
exemplifies Richards' separated PAC, thereby accounting for the
misalignment of harmonic and melodic closure. Invoking Schmalfeldt's
"becoming," such a cadence (as noted above) will be labeled IAC→PAC to
indicate retrospectively its status as a cadence that is fully
conclusive, both melodically and harmonically.

{% include center_column_img.html src='assets/articles/mackay/img/ex_3.png' img_size='100' fig_num='3' fig_caption='Haydn, Sonata in E major, Hob. XVI: 31, first movement, mm. 1--8.'%}
</section>
<section markdown="1">
<h2>Longer-Range Melodic Deferral: The "Separated Cadence" and the Subordinate Theme→Codetta Cadential Complex</h2>

The foregoing passages illustrate that harmonic and melodic completion
need not coincide exactly to create or approximate the full harmonic and
melodic closure of a PAC at the phrase level. As a longer-range
manifestation of this same phenomenon, an IAC at the end of a theme may
subsequently reach full closure through the addition of a phrase member
(a contrasting idea or cadential extension), a complete phrase, or a new
formal section that eventually turns melodically to the tonic. As
Richards (2010, 39) notes, cadences embellished with appoggiaturas, in
which the delay in melodic completion is brief, "serve as important
models for more complex situations in their use of a cadential arrival
that is spread across more than a single beat." Clementi's Sonata in G
Minor, op. 34, no. 2, first movement (ca. 1795), will serve as a
preliminary illustration of this technique.

The first movement, complete with slow introduction, is symphonic in
scope and execution. The stormy exposition moves from the home tonality
to the expected mediant tonality, B<span style="font-family: music;">&#x266D;</span> major, tinged though with extensive
modal mixture as the section nears its conclusion. The goal is a V<span style="font-family: music;">&#xEA5D;</span>--I
cadential motion in this key in m. 79, which serves as the EEC, or
essential expositional closure, according to the analysis by Hepokoski
and Darcy (2006, 62) of the sonata's first half (see [Example 4a](#ex-4a)). As part of the cadential gesture, m. 78 features an
arpeggiated dominant seventh in the melody (<span style="font-family: music;">&#xEF03;</span>--<span style="font-family: music;">&#xEF01;</span>--<span style="font-family: music;">&#xEF06;</span>), which
highlights a melodic tritone span that requires resolution. In m. 79,
Clementi resolves <span style="font-family: music;">&#xEF03;</span>, the upper note of the tritone, to <span style="font-family: music;">&#xEF02;</span>, creating a
melodically open-ended effect on a tonic chord. (Clementi almost
immediately adds an A<span style="font-family: music;">&#x266D;</span> to this harmony, transforming the final tonic
chord into a secondary dominant, but the fleeting effect of an IAC
remains active in the listener's ear.)

{% include center_column_img.html src='assets/articles/mackay/img/ex_4a.png' img_size='100' fig_num='4a' fig_caption='Excerpts from Clementi, Sonata in G Minor, op. 34, no. 2, Measures 74--83.'%}
{% include center_column_img.html src='assets/articles/mackay/img/ex_4b.png' img_size='100' fig_num='4b' fig_caption='Excerpts from Clementi, Sonata in G Minor, op. 34, no. 2, Measures 233--236.'%}
{% include center_column_img.html src='assets/articles/mackay/img/ex_4c.png' img_size='100' fig_num='4c' fig_caption='Excerpts from Clementi, Sonata in G Minor, op. 34, no. 2, Measures 251--256.'%}

Following the bass arrival of m. 79, the melody continues to spin out
over a tonic pedal in a brief codetta. In this passage, Clementi
restates the <span style="font-family: music;">&#xEF03;</span>--<span style="font-family: music;">&#xEF06;</span> tritone span in the melody, but this time resolves
the lower note, <span style="font-family: music;">&#xEF06;</span>, upward to the tonic to provide full melodic
closure. Clementi's decision to resolve the subdominant scale degree
first (rather than resolving the <span style="font-family: music;">&#xEF06;</span>--<span style="font-family: music;">&#xEF00;</span> motion) was what created the
subordinate theme's inconclusive melodic closure. The final four
measures, far from being unambiguously post-cadential (as would be the
norm), act as an extension of the subordinate theme: this concluding
passage accounts for the melodic line's remaining active tone, tying up
the exposition's final tonal loose end. In Sonata Theory terms, the
"IAC-effect" of m. 79 weakens the EEC; thus, the exposition's "C-space"
takes on the responsibility of completing the cadential process
(Hepokoski and Darcy 2006, 169).

The voice-leading situation in these measures strongly resembles the PAC
with appoggiatura (or other melodic embellishment) discussed above. Such
authentic cadences likewise involve an artful melodic delaying of the
tonic: they differ only in the span of time between harmonic closure and
melodic completion. Consider as well that mm. 79--83, in a triple meter
work played at *allegro* tempo, would span barely five seconds in
performance, allowing the listener to link the bass arrival of m. 79
with the melodic arrival of m. 82. Further, this brief span of time is
not substantially longer than the length of melodic delay that an
appoggiatura or *Überhang* would create at a slow tempo. To be certain,
the three-measure gap between harmonic and melodic completion does not
prevent this passage from projecting a sense of full harmonic and
melodic closure, though Clementi's artful delaying of the melody's goal
tone creates a musically nuanced conclusion rather than an unambiguously
forthright one.

Clementi seemed to recognize the deliberate ambiguity of this cadential
effect, based on how he reworked this passage later in the movement: the
parallel passage in the recapitulation (mm. 233--236) is considerably
less elusive, with full melodic and harmonic closure occurring
simultaneously, rather than being separated by multiple measures as they
had been in the exposition (see [Example 4b](#ex-4b)).

In this passage, the subordinate theme's final phrase concludes with a
PAC, though with registral shift. Modeled on a prior phrase ending (m.
218), the tonic note arrives at a *fortissimo* dynamic in m. 236,
followed by an extended scalar passage in octaves. Clementi thereby
eliminates the temporal disconnect between melodic and harmonic
completion for a more conclusive cadential effect. (Granted, the
registral shift suggests an elision with the following phrase rather
than an unambiguous conclusion similar to m. 64ff.) Clementi drives home
this point later in the movement as well: a reprise of the subordinate
theme's second half leads to yet another PAC in m. 256 (see [Example 4c](#ex-4c)). This time, Clementi resolves the melody to the tonic
in the same octave, after which four measures, unfolding over a tonic
pedal, lead to a brief codetta.

Thus, as the movement progresses, Clementi provides an increase in
cadential clarity, moving from a separated cadence in the exposition, to
an elided PAC late in the recapitulation, to a forthright, full close on
a PAC in its final measures. This clarification sheds new light on the
nature of the cadence that concluded the subordinate theme in m. 79:
despite the melodic delay in its initial presentation, Clementi presents
this cadence as being formally final, if gesturally incomplete; thus,
not as an IAC but as a PAC from which the composer has artfully
deviated, for rhetorical effect.

The melodic delaying of a cadential goal at the end of a subordinate
theme also appears, if rarely, in the sonata-form movements of Haydn and
Beethoven. If one agrees with Caplin's assertion (1998, 97) that a
subordinate theme must end with a PAC, thus creating full harmonic and
melodic closure, such anomalous closes must be reconciled analytically
in some way. For instance, in Haydn's String Quartet in G minor
("Rider"), op. 74, no. 3, first movement, Caplin reconciles the IAC at
the end of the subordinate theme by locating the melodic closure in the
final codetta (Caplin 1998, 270, n.10). This work, virtually
contemporaneous with the Clementi sonata, dates from 1793, composed
between Haydn's two London sojourns. This movement is noteworthy for its
deliberate avoidance of PACs until late in the form, as Haydn creatively
blurs formal boundaries in the exposition and elsewhere.

The opening measures of op. 74, no. 3 feature multiple half cadences at
phrase endings, as the main theme leads to the transition. Later, Haydn
gradually confirms the subordinate key with a dominant arrival in mm.
26--27, an elusive HC in m. 32, then with an IAC in m. 54.{% include footnote.html footnote_number='11' footnote_text=page.footnote_11%} The
opening movement's subordinate theme (mm. 54--70) ends similarly.
Distinctly closing in character, featuring a musically straightforward
"popular style,"{% include footnote.html footnote_number='12' footnote_text=page.footnote_12%} this theme divides into four parallel phrases, all
of which feature a I--IV--V<span style="font-family: music;">&#xEA5D;</span>--I cadential progression with a melodic
close on <span style="font-family: music;">&#xEF02;</span> (as shown in [Example 5a](#ex-5a)). This
compositional decision is highly unusual, as it creates a melodically
open-ended IAC in place of the conclusive PAC that one normally expects
at the end of the subordinate theme. The second violin does contribute
full melodic closure with a <span style="font-family: music;">&#xEF06;</span>--<span style="font-family: music;">&#xEF07;</span> motion, but the first violin
undercuts the finality of this gesture by stating a <span style="font-family: music;">&#xEF03;</span>--<span style="font-family: music;">&#xEF02;</span> motion
above it.

The codetta compensates for this momentary inconclusiveness: Haydn ends
multiple two-measure segments melodically on the local tonic B<span style="font-family: music;">&#x266D;</span> as the
codetta unfolds (first in m. 72, again in mm. 76 and 78, the last
passage reprising Violin I's countermelody of mm. 69--70). Thus, the
codetta's melodic continuation retrospectively marks the subordinate
theme's concluding IAC as a PAC in which the melodic and harmonic goals
do not coincide temporally (once again Richards' separated cadence), as
was illustrated above with Clementi's op. 34, no. 2.

Haydn's use of mixed formal signals to manipulate listeners'
expectations invites multiple formal readings of this concluding
section. The melodically inconclusive cadence in m. 70 might suggest
that the apparent theme of mm. 54--70 serves as the first part of a
larger formal unit. This passage, though seemingly thematic, is fully
prolongational in character. Its four parallel segments all move
I--IV--V<span style="font-family: music;">&#xEA5D;</span>--I harmonically, but they all achieve their final tonic in a
largely non-cadential fashion, with no noticeable pause or rhetorical
emphasis.

Given their collective function as an opening gesture, these 16 measures
(an eight-measure unit plus its immediate varied repetition) could serve
as a presentation phrase, if one invokes the R=2N expedient discussed by
Caplin (1998, 35). Analyzed thus, one "real" (analytical) measure is
equivalent to two notated measures, thereby doubling all of the standard
formal proportions. As such, the passage opens with what would be
analytically equivalent to a four-measure basic idea (mm. 55--62), which
then repeats, with slight variation, in mm. 63--70. (Haydn adds a
triplet countermelody in Violin I.) This fourfold statement of similar
material, though suggesting an expanded presentation function,
nonetheless has some affinity with the periodic model: in mm. 58 and 66,
Haydn adds a 4--3 suspension to the melody, which mm. 62 and 70 lack.
This subtle embellishment marks the first and third segments of this
theme as opening phrases, while the (unembellished) second and fourth
phrases, with their forthright rhythmic conclusion, act (relatively
speaking) as closing phrases.

Measures 71--78, a closing section that marks the exposition's final
gesture with a series of basic idea fragments in the melody, supported
by key-confirming V--I harmonic motions, completes the exposition's
musical trajectory. If mm. 54--70 comprise an expanded presentation
function, this later segment completes the sentence, comprising a
continuation→cadential formal unit. Thus, in this sonata exposition, the
codetta is no mere afterthought: it is a vital musical corrective to the
incomplete cadential processes of the subordinate theme group.

{% include center_column_img.html src='assets/articles/mackay/img/ex_5a.png' img_size='100' fig_num='5a' fig_caption='Selections from Haydn, String Quartet in G Minor (&quot;Rider&quot;), op. 74, no. 3, first movement, Measures 54--78.'%}

{% include center_column_img.html src='assets/articles/mackay/img/ex_5b.png' img_size='100' fig_num='5b' fig_caption='Selections from Haydn, String Quartet in G Minor (&quot;Rider&quot;), op. 74, no. 3, first movement, Measures 168--197.'%}

This reading has interesting ramifications as to the passage's overall
form. If mm. 54--78 comprise a greatly expanded sentence design, this
segment []{.mark}would be a rare instance of a subordinate theme→codetta
fused formal unit. The subordinate theme segment (mm. 54--70) serves as
the opening gesture (an eight-measure presentation phrase, stated
twice), while the codetta (mm. 71--78), with its repeated V<span style="font-family: music;">&#xEA5D;</span>--I
key-confirming harmonies, serves as the concluding gesture, analogous to
Caplin's continuation→cadential function. The codetta, while supplying
the requisite post-cadential confirmation typical of its role, also
displays enough of the expected features of continuation (fragmentation,
acceleration, intensification, and liquidation) to articulate this
function, at least rhetorically. In effect, the putative subordinate
theme serves in retrospect as the beginning of an unusually expansive
closing section, whose goal is to ground the tonal tension of the
previous measures with a series of key-defining tonic prolongations.
Thus, Haydn fuses these two customarily disparate formal functions into
a single, multi-faceted whole.

Haydn reworks this passage in the recapitulation for greater harmonic
clarity (see [Example 5b](#ex-5b)). As a first significant
difference, the IAC of m. 54 (that had concluded the transition section)
becomes a PAC on the tonic in the parallel passage (m. 168), ushering in
the parallel major key in which the movement will conclude. Moreover,
while Haydn retains the fourfold phrase repetition from the exposition,
ending each with <span style="font-family: music;">&#xEF02;</span> as its melodic goal, he extends even further the
compensatory function of the codetta. Fully *six* two-measure units
feature a V<span style="font-family: music;">&#xEA5D;</span>--I harmonic motion with the tonic as the melodic goal. To
the extent that the subordinate theme was perceived as incomplete, Haydn
compensates mightily for this perceived lacuna with the repeated, almost
obsessive, melodic turns to the tonic to create, if retroactively, a
sense of complete closure.

Nearly two decades later in 1810, Beethoven adopted a similar cadential
procedure in the first movement of his Piano Sonata in E<span style="font-family: music;">&#x266D;</span> major, op. 81a
("Das Lebewohl"), which features an exposition whose ambiguous final
cadence results in a blending of subordinate theme and codetta functions
(see [Example 6](#ex-6)). Given the *allegro* tempo and *alla
breve* meter, the movement, similar to the first movement of Haydn's op.
74, no. 3, could be read as R=2N. Thus, the twofold statement of
material in mm. 50--57, which might otherwise be mistaken for the entire
subordinate theme despite its brevity, instead comprises only its first
half---specifically, the presentation phrase of a 16-measure sentence.
Following this segment, Beethoven turns to codetta-like harmonic syntax:
mm. 58--61 form a two-measure cadential idea, stated twice, suggesting a
continuation→cadential phrase that ends in m. 62 with an IAC.{% include footnote.html footnote_number='13' footnote_text=page.footnote_13%}

Though the exposition's harmonic processes are now complete, there is
still the matter of closing off this formal unit melodically as well.
Since Beethoven still needs to create four measures of material to
temporally balance the continuation→cadential unit with the
eight-measure presentation segment that had preceded it, he uses this
extra space to wind the melody gradually downward to the tonic---a
voice-leading procedure recalling Richards' separated cadence. Notably,
though Beethoven restates this passage virtually unchanged in the
recapitulation, he does follow it with a massive coda, whose multiple
PACs amply compensate for the prior cadential ambiguity.

{% include center_column_img.html src='assets/articles/mackay/img/ex_6.png' img_size='100' fig_num='6' fig_caption='Beethoven, Sonata in E<span class=\'music-font\'>b</span> Major (&quot;Das Lebewohl&quot;), op. 81a, first movement, mm. 50--65.'%}

As the preceding two works suggest, the notion of one formal unit
"becoming" another in retrospect, first posited by Schmalfeldt (and
adopted by Caplin at the phrase level), can be elevated to a higher
formal level to link separate middle-scale formal units. Using the rare
formal situation of subordinate theme→codetta as a model, Schmalfeldt's
"becoming" can account for the fusion of thematic regions elsewhere in
the exposition or recapitulation. For instance, main theme→transition,
i.e., grand antecedent plus grand consequent (or continuation), is an
apt description, *pace* Hepokoski and Darcy (2006, 77--80), of [an
open-ended main theme followed by a dependent transition]{.mark}.
Similarly, transition→subordinate theme aptly describes the
developmental middle section of a three-part (continuous) exposition
(Jens Peter Larsen's *Entwickslungpartie*, or "elaboration
section"{% include footnote.html footnote_number='14' footnote_text=page.footnote_14%}). Furthermore, in sonata-form movements where the end of
the development is not clearly articulated with a HC and subsequent
dominant pedal (a common procedure in Haydn, but also seen in
Beethoven's Sonata in A<span style="font-family: music;">&#x266D;</span> major, op. 110, first movement), one might
similarly posit development→recapitulation to describe the formal
type.{% include footnote.html footnote_number='15' footnote_text=page.footnote_15%} This expansion of Schmalfeldt's concept of "becoming" to the
deepest level of formal structure would be the logical endpoint of such
an analytical approach.
</section>

<section markdown="1">

<h2>IAC as Analogue to Full Closure? Cadential Deferral in Beethoven's Sonata in A<span style="font-family: music;">&#x266D;</span> Major, op. 110</h2>

Turning to a work from later in the nineteenth century, Beethoven's
Sonata in A<span style="font-family: music;">&#x266D;</span> major, op. 110, completed in December 1821, provides a new
twist on the concluding IAC formal situation, plus a fascinating
analytical quandary. As with the Clementi, Haydn, and Beethoven
movements discussed above, the exposition's final cadence features full
harmonic closure but defers its full melodic closure (see [Example 7a](#ex-7a)).

{% include center_column_img.html src='assets/articles/mackay/img/ex_7a.png' img_size='70' fig_num='7' fig_caption='Selections from Beethoven, Sonata in A<span class=\'music-font\'>b</span> major, op. 110, first movement, Measures 33--38.'%}
{% include center_column_img.html src='assets/articles/mackay/img/ex_7b.png' img_size='70' fig_num='7' fig_caption='Selections from Beethoven, Sonata in A<span class=\'music-font\'>b</span> major, op. 110, first movement, Measures 92--100.'%}

In m. 34, Beethoven superimposes <span style="font-family: music;">&#xEF04;</span> above the phrase's goal chord to
coincide with the onset of closing material, deferring the melodic
arrival of the tonic, which occurs saliently in the upper register, to
m. 38. Like the excerpts discussed above, this apparent IAC could be
described as a separated PAC: the ascent to <span style="font-family: music;">&#xEF00;</span> in m. 38 metaphorically
completes the cadential moment by effecting full melodic closure.
Alternatively, one could view m. 34 as a PAC whose primary melodic goal
is overwritten by a less conclusive melodic-cadential motion above it,
following Vande Moortele (2009, 58 n.13),{% include footnote.html footnote_number='16' footnote_text=page.footnote_16%} as Beethoven places the
off-tonic scale degree of the upper part (<span style="font-family: music;">&#xEF04;</span>) above the full melodic
closure of the alto voice, <span style="font-family: music;">&#xEF06;</span>--<span style="font-family: music;">&#xEF07;</span>, in m. 34.

The de-emphasis of closure at the movement's conclusion is in keeping
with Beethoven's strategy earlier in the work. Similar to Haydn's
cadential procedures in the opening movement of the "Rider" Quartet and
his own strategies in "Das Lebewohl," op. 81a, Beethoven undercuts the
sense of closure throughout the movement. The chorale-like main theme
(mm. 1--12) elides seamlessly with the next section's glittering
thirty-second note arpeggio figuration, which drifts toward the
subordinate key without a medial caesura, thus creating a continuous
exposition where transition and subordinate theme fuse into a larger
formal unit. (Per Schmalfeldt's concept of "becoming," such a segment
comprises a transition→subordinate theme formal unit, as discussed
previously.) {% include footnote.html footnote_number='17' footnote_text=page.footnote_17%}

Thus far, Beethoven's cadential strategies at the exposition's end
recall the Clementi (op. 34, no. 2) and Haydn (op. 74, no. 3) passages
discussed previously. Unlike his immediate predecessors, however,
Beethoven does not compensate for the lack of cadential finality in the
exposition as the movement continues. The development, a single long
sequential passage based on main theme material, lacks any cadence; even
the expected HC and extensive standing on the dominant at development's
end, of which Beethoven was normally so fond, is absent. The
recapitulation and coda likewise lack a clearly articulated final
cadence. In fact, but for the quickly abandoned PAC of m. 12 that ends
the main theme, this movement seems bereft of meaningful closure
altogether.

The seeming lack of meaningful closure warrants a close examination of
how this movement ends, and leads to the unanswerable question: to what
extent, and to what length of time, is melodic deferral of a PAC truly
perceptible and analytically meaningful, before one might label a V--I
thematic close without full melodic closure as an IAC? A related
question: if, as Caplin asserts, cadence and closure are not synonymous,
then how does one gauge the formal and rhetorical effect that Beethoven
provides us in this movement, an artfully understated conclusion that
does not involve overt cadential articulation? The following discussion
provides a few thoughts.

The recapitulation's closing gesture duplicates the exposition's final
cadence with an equally ambiguous result (see [Example 7b](#ex-7b)). Beethoven concludes the recapitulation's harmonic
trajectory with an IAC (or covered PAC) in m. 93. This is where the
similarities between exposition and recapitulation end, however. The
codetta, instead of completing the melodic motion to the tonic as it had
done in m. 38, meanders in the upper register before descending into a
chorale-like passage that ends with a HC in m. 104. Rather than forming
a separated cadence as he had in the exposition, Beethoven creates a
formally ambiguous final gesture that points forward to the more
flexible cadential designs of the next generation of composers.{% include footnote.html footnote_number='18' footnote_text=page.footnote_18%}

The following coda avoids a final cadence as well. Beethoven begins with
the arpeggio passage from m. 12ff., arriving at another apparent IAC in
m. 114, which prolongs hope yet again for melodic completion that would
"correct" this closing gesture as a separated cadence, much as he had
done at the exposition's conclusion in m. 39. Yet <span style="font-family: music;">&#xEF02;</span> remains the
primary melodic tone until the movement ends in m. 116 (see [Example 8](#ex-8)). Thus, unlike works such as the opening movement of
op. 81a (and the *Hammerklavier* Sonata, op. 106), in which Beethoven
does ultimately end with a PAC, in this work he leaves the movement
rhetorically incomplete. The decaying sound of the first movement's
final sonority meshes with the second movement's opening chord, whose
melody begins with the same pitch (here, reinterpreted as <span style="font-family: music;">&#xEF04;</span> of the
relative minor).

{% include center_column_img.html src='assets/articles/mackay/img/ex_8.png' img_size='80' fig_num='8' fig_caption='Beethoven, Sonata in A<span class=\'music-font\'>b</span> Major, op. 110: link between first movement (mm. 111--116, end of coda) and second movement (mm. 1--16).'%}

If this ending is truly a separated cadence, where does the melodic
completion occur? The middle movement modulates to A<span style="font-family: music;">&#x266D;</span> major and cadences
with a PAC in measure 16, but this arrival is in a different octave from
the final gesture of the first movement; moreover, it occurs in the
middle of a formal section. Surely, a terminal IAC as the opening
movement's ultimate goal is Beethoven's intended effect here, with no
need for full melodic closure at a later point. This compositional
decision permits him closure that is harmonically complete, though
melodically incomplete. (Granted, the IAC elicits a convenient
open-endedness that enables Beethoven to link this ending seamlessly to
the middle movement.) The dubious, discarded reading of this IAC as a
separated cadence that defers its conclusion to a subsequent movement
does speak to the musical effect of the movement's final measures on the
listener, to whom it evokes a feeling of longing, an undefinable sense
of incompleteness---a sense that Beethoven only fully resolves with the
finale's concluding PAC.
</section>
<section markdown="1">
<h2>Conclusion</h2>

The primary purpose of this study is to provide an in-depth analysis of
apparent IACs that occur in places where a more conclusive cadence (PAC)
would be expected in Classical sonata-form movements, especially in
formal locations such as the end of a subordinate theme group, where
anything other than the fullest possible cadential closure is distinctly
contrary to the norm. Though Caplin (along with Hepokoski and Darcy)
consider the PAC at the exposition's conclusion to be *pro forma*, they
do mention a handful of works that do not conform to this convention, in
which the subordinate theme group seemingly concludes with an IAC. Such
non-normative types of closure require further consideration and
explanation. As Richards (2010, 32) notes, holding firmly to strictly
defined categories "exposes the relative rarity of closural functions
\[non-cadential phrase endings\] and draws attention to their expressive
effect and formal significance when employed." Such non-cadential
endings (or marginally cadential endings, such as the IAC) necessitate a
rethinking of their formal role and purpose in articulating large-scale
formal boundaries.

As the works examined in this essay attest, when apparently open-ended
cadences occur as the exposition's harmonic goal in the Classical era,
they typically function as PACs with their melodic goal delayed (i.e.,
Richards' separated cadence, analyzed in this study as IAC→PAC). Owing
to the technique of melodic deferral, full harmonic and full melodic
closure can be considerably out of phase without negating the sense of a
full conclusion. The only question would be what length of melodic
deferral would disqualify the separated PAC as a realistic analytical
construct. Perhaps this debate evinces an analytical gray area, which
would be the task of the performer to resolve at their musical
discretion. Nonetheless, the formal principles invoked in this study
provide at least some quantifiable guidelines for this performance
decision.

Denying cadential status to the IAC stems from a centuries-long
historical precedent. Treatise evidence from the Renaissance until the
early Classical era makes no distinction between cadential evasion in
the bass (the deceptive cadence) and cadential evasion in the melodic
line (the imperfect authentic cadence): both types of evasion create a
type of incomplete closure that (strictly speaking) is fundamentally
non-cadential in effect, thereby deferring the full cadential arrival
until a later phrase.{% include footnote.html footnote_number='19' footnote_text=page.footnote_19%} This notion of cadential deferral may
ultimately be the source of the early Romantics' fascination with
incomplete formal designs. In Clementi's op. 34, no. 2, Haydn's op. 74,
no. 3, and Beethoven's op. 81a, long-range melodic processes delay the
expected PAC, but it does eventually arrive. However, Beethoven's op.
110 brings us very close to the next stage of development: a work that
promises full harmonic and melodic closure, but never fulfills that
promise. Thus, recalling the words of Charles Rosen (1998b, 50), this
work illustrates the embryonic beginnings of "the Romantic Fragment:
imperfect and yet complete."
</section>
<section id="works-cited" markdown="1" >
<h2>Works Cited</h2>

Barrett-Ayres, Reginald. 1974. *Joseph Haydn and the String Quartet*.
London: Barrie & Jenkins.

Burstein, L. Poundie. 2015. "The Half Cadence and Related Analytic
Fictions." In *What Is a Cadence? Theoretical and Analytical
Perspectives on Cadence in the Classical Repertoire*, edited by Markus
Neuwirth and Pieter Bergé, 86--155. Leuven: Leuven University Press.

Burstein, L. Poundie. 2020. *Journeys Through Galant Expositions.* New
York: Oxford University Press.

Caplin, William E. 1998. *Classical Form: [A Theory of Formal Functions
for the Instrumental Music of Haydn, Mozart, and Beethoven]{.mark}*[.
New York: Oxford University Press.]{.mark}

[]{.mark}

\_\_\_\_\_. [2004. "The Classical Cadence: Conceptions and
Misconceptions." *Journal of the American Musicological Society* 57 (1):
52--118.]{.mark}

[]{.mark}

\_\_\_\_\_. 2018. "Beyond the Classical Cadence: Thematic Closure in
Early Romantic Music." *Music Theory Spectrum* 40 (1): 1--26.

Caplin, William E., and Nathan John Martin. 2016. "The 'Continuous
Exposition' and the Concept of Subordinate Theme." *Music Analysis* 35
(1): 4--43.

Gjerdingen, Robert O. 2007. *Music in the Galant Style*. [New York:
Oxford University Press.]{.mark}

Graue, Jerald C. 2013. "Sonata Form Problems by Jens Peter Larsen
(1963), Translated by Jerald C. Graue (1978)." *HAYDN: The Online
Journal of the Haydn Society of North America* 3 (2).
https://remix.berklee.edu/haydn-journal/vol3/iss2/16.

Grave, Floyd, and Margaret Grave. 2006. *The String Quartets of Joseph
Haydn*. New York: Oxford University Press.

Green, Douglass M. 1979. *Form in Tonal Music*. Second edition. New
York: Schirmer.

[]{.mark}

[Hepokoski, James. 2021. *A Sonata Theory Handbook*. New York: Oxford
University Press.]{.mark}

Hepokoski, James, and Warren Darcy. 2006. *Elements of Sonata Theory:
[Norms, Types, and Deformations in the Late-Eighteenth-Century Sonata.
]{.mark}*[New York: Oxford University Press.]{.mark}

[]{.mark}

[Keller, Hans. 1986. *The Great Haydn Quartets: Their Interpretation*.
London: Dent.]{.mark}

[]{.mark}

[Koch, Heinrich Christoph. 1983 (1793). *Introductory Essay on
Composition: The Mechanical Rules of Melody, Sections 3 and 4,*
translated and edited by Nancy Kovaleff Baker. New Haven: Yale
University Press.]{.mark}

[]{.mark}

[Landon, H. C. Robbins. 1976. *Haydn: Chronicle and Works. Volume III:
Haydn in England, 1791*]{.mark}--[*1795.* Bloomington: Indiana
University Press.]{.mark}

[]{.mark}

MacKay, James. 2017. "A Case for Declassifying the IAC as a Cadence
Type: Cadence and Thematic Design in Selected Early-to Middle-Period
Haydn Sonatas." *Ad Parnassum: A Journal of Late Eighteenth- and
Nineteenth-Century Instrumental Music* 15 (30): 1--27.

Marston, Nicholas. 2001. "Review of *Classical Form: [A Theory of Formal
Functions for the Instrumental Music of Haydn, Mozart, and
Beethoven]{.mark}*[.]{.mark}" *Music Analysis* 20 (1): 143--49.

Miyake, Jan. 2009. "Readdressing Haydn's Formal Models: Common Paths
Through Expositions." *Theory and Practice* 34: 31--46.

Richards, Mark. 2010. "Closure in Classical Themes: The Role of Melody
and Texture in Cadences, Closural Function, and the Separated Cadence."
*Intersections: Canadian Journal of Music* 31 (1): 25--45.

Richards, Mark. 2012. "Teaching Sonata Expositions Through Their Order
of Cadences." *Journal of Music Theory Pedagogy* 26.

[[https://digitalcollections.lipscomb.edu/jmtp/vol26/iss1/7]{.underline}](https://digitalcollections.lipscomb.edu/jmtp/vol26/iss1/7)

Rosen, Charles. 1998a. *The Classical Style*: *Haydn, Mozart,
Beethoven*. Expanded edition. New York: W. W. Norton & Company.

\_\_\_\_\_. 1998b. *The Romantic Generation*. Cambridge, MA: Harvard
University Press.

Schmalfeldt, Janet. 1992. "Cadential Processes: The Evaded Cadence and
the 'One More Time' Technique." *Journal of Musicological Research* 12
(1--2): 1--52.

\_\_\_\_\_. 2011. *In the Process of Becoming: Analytic and
Philosophical Perspectives on Form in Early Nineteenth-Century Music*.
New York: Oxford University Press.

Tovey, Donald Francis 1998. *A Companion to Beethoven's Piano Sonatas*.
Revised edition. London: The Associated Board of the Royal Schools of
Music.

Vande Moortele, Steven. 2009. *Two-Dimensional Sonata Form: Cycle in
Single-Movement Instrumental Works by Liszt, Strauss, Schoenberg and
Zemlinsky.* Leuven: Leuven University Press.

Yust, Jason. 2016. "Hypermeter, Form, and Closure in Haydn and
Beethoven's Codas." Paper presented at the Sixth International New
Beethoven Research Conference, Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada.

Zhang, Xieyi (Abby). 2022. "Apparently Imperfect: On the Analytical
Issues of the IAC." *Music Theory Spectrum* 44 (2): 191--212.
</section>

