---
layout: review_article
volume: Volume 38, June 2024
title: Review-article
reviewed: 
- title: The Cambridge Companion to Video Game Music
  author: Edited by Melanie Y. Fritsch and Tim Summers
  publisher: Cambridge University Press, 2021, 446 pages.
author: "William O'Hara"
short-name: "ohara"
abstract: ""
---

{% capture footnote_1 %} See Collins (2012). {% endcapture %}
{% capture footnote_2 %} See Whalen (2004), Miller (2012), and Moseley (2013). See also Austin (2016), a strong essay collection on this topic. {% endcapture %}
{% capture footnote_3 %} See, for instance, Murphy (2006), Murphy (2019), and Lehman (2018). {% endcapture %}
{% capture footnote_4 %} The latter argument builds on Reale's (2015) Society for Music Theory presentation, summarizing and strengthening his memorable argument that the "transformational attitude" presented in Lewin (1983) is ideally suited for analyzing videogame music. {% endcapture %}
{% capture footnote_5 %} Such sound effects were almost always *synthesized* as tones rather than being played back from sound recordings; the Nintendo Entertainment System's (NES) capacity for samples was very limited, meaning that most NES sound effects have a pitch profile and some (such as collecting coins or pausing the game in *Super Mario Bros.*) have identifiable interval content. See Altice (2015, 249--288) for more on the technical capabilities of the NES. {% endcapture %}
{% capture footnote_6 %} Though publishers may simply be trying to save pages of back matter (and thus production costs), I would argue that books and essay collections minimizing their scholarly apparatus is also an accessibility issue: where might a new reader look if they wish to know more, if not to footnotes, endnotes, or bibliographies? Minimizing citations all too often serves as accidental gatekeeping, separating new readers from the deeper context that might contribute to their understanding. {% endcapture %}
{% capture footnote_7 %} Among the most significant non-musical game studies texts discussed within the body of the book but not included in the Bibliography are Kocurek (2015), Consalvo (2016), Calleja (2011), and Aarseth (1997). {% endcapture %}
{% capture footnote_8 %} Wikipedia lists 520 officially released games for the Atari VCS, almost 1,200 for the Sega Master System and the Genesis together, and nearly 1,400 titles for the NES---nearly half of which appeared only in Japan. {% endcapture %}
{% capture footnote_9 %} For a similar kind of self-reflection from an indie game composer, see Golding (2021). {% endcapture %}

<section markdown="1" >

To study and teach video game music is to be continually confronted with
competing and often disorienting realities. Game music has a deep
history, stretching back to the "Eureka" moment of Frankensteinian
improvisation by which Atari engineer Al Alcorn produced the famous
beeps of *Pong* (1972) by diverting some spare voltage into a simple
buzzer, and even far beyond that into a noisy pre-history that includes
pinball machines, shooting galleries, and other mechanized
entertainments of the twentieth-century arcade midway.{% include footnote.html footnote_number='1' footnote_text=footnote_1%} But the game
industry and its sonic practices also hurtle forward at an alarming
pace, the rhythms of technological and stylistic paradigm shifts better
measured by annual trade shows than by the slow epochal movements found
elsewhere in media studies: the invention and influence of the
telegraph, telephone, Internet, and so forth. Put another way: each
four-year cycle of university students matriculating and graduating
constitutes nearly 10% of the entire history of game music, indicating
the field's youth. In much the same way as the riotous rhythms of
Stravinsky's *Le sacre du printemps* (1913) are as old now as the
incisive E-flats of Beethoven's *Eroica* symphony were when the Dance of
the Adolescents rocked the Théâtre des Champs Élysées, so too are some
of game music's most defining moments much closer to those primordial
buzzes in a Silicon Valley office park than they are to the present.
High quality audio entered the industry in the early 1990s, and game
composers have had access to full symphony orchestras, recorded in
stereo, for far longer than they didn't. To write off the sounds of
video games as mere "bleeps and bloops," as many casually still do, is
to judge a 51-year-old by the braces and freckles in their fifth-grade
yearbook photo. Game music has arrived. It has grown up, and done so
alongside the political, social, and technological developments of the
past half-century.

The study of game music is thus the study of twentieth-century and
increasingly twenty-first-century history. It feels very appropriate,
then, that *The Cambridge Companion to Video Game Music* (*CCVGM*)
begins with the timeline that maps important moments in video game music
onto world events: mostly technological and scientific, but also
geopolitical and cultural. The medium of the timeline is also an
appropriate statement of the book's ambition: *CCVGM* sets out to
present a broad view of a diverse and ever-changing discipline,
representing both theoretical and practical research (4) and aligning
scholarly trends in the study of game music with approaches drawn from
musicology, the humanities, and the social sciences more broadly. What's
more, the volume takes up a dual mission of serving as an introductory
or reference work, and of presenting new research on game music and
sound (4). While ludomusicology has from its inception revolved around
edited collections and interdisciplinary journals, *CCVGM* distinguishes
itself by presenting a combination of introductory information,
foundational work, and a cross-section of new and forward-looking
scholarship. The book also usefully bridges scholarly research with
perspectives from practice, whether from academics who teach in
technically oriented game design or composition programs, or from a
diverse roster of game composers and producers who have written chapters
or whose voices appear in interviews.

*The Cambridge Companion to Video Game Music* is edited by Melanie
Fritsch and Tim Summers, two of the five members of the pan-European
"Ludomusicology Research Group"
([www.ludomusicology.org](http://www.ludomusicology.org); two other
members, Andra Ivanescu and Michiel Kamp, have contributed chapters).
*CCVGM* presents a diverse and international picture of a thriving,
healthy discipline, and one which has been highly international since
its inception. Contributors to the collection hail from the United
States, Canada, the United Kingdom, Germany, the Netherlands, South
Africa, Japan, Australia, and more. The book consists of 24 chapters
written by both scholars and practitioners, grouped into six sections.
The first section is concerned with **Chiptune,** a term encompassing
both the "raw, geometric sound," as Kenneth McAlpine puts it (chapter 2,
33), of simple electronic synthesis that characterized the 8-bit
videogame consoles of the 1980s and various subgenres of popular music
that continue to employ or draw inspiration from those sounds.
**Creating and Programming Game Music** consists primarily of
testimonials, reflections, and "how-tos" from industry practitioners.
**Analytical Approaches to Video Game Music** is the book's most
extensive section and its most methodologically diverse: the six
contributions include historical and taxonomic studies of game music,
reflections on semiotics and hermeneutics, and analytical chapters using
established music-theoretical techniques or exploring the liminal space
between sound, music, and dialogue. While brief, the fourth section,
**Realities, Perception, and Psychology**, hints at the exciting
potential of player-centered approaches to game music, by including
perspectives on virtuality and ecological perception, emotion, and
biofeedback; it is here that *CCVGM* hints most obviously at the massive
iceberg of interdisciplinary game audio research yet to be carried out,
floating below the surface of what has already been done. The four
essays in **Game Music, Contexts, and Identities** demonstrate both
games and game-related media as objects of historical and cultural
interpretation, embedding not only the ideas and signifiers of those who
make them, market them, and play them, but also the collective labor of
translating, archiving, and critiquing them. The final section, **Beyond
the Game**, examines the intersection of game soundtracks and popular
music in the realms of music licensing and artist promotion,
participatory culture, and game music concerts.

Each section of the book begins with a six- to eight-page essay by the
volume's editors, who offer context and summarize previous research
related to each topic. These essays, while concise, offer perhaps the
most comprehensive introduction to major trends in ludomusicology, with
extensive footnotes highlighting influential books and articles. Taken
together, the book's six sections form an effective narrative that
begins with history, moves through current techniques and issues in both
the creation and analysis of games, and then expands outwards into wider
considerations of games and their music as significant cultural
artifacts. The editors display an impressive command of ludomusicology's
growing literature, and a knack for clearly explaining the intellectual
history and significance of individual areas of game music studies. Some
individual chapters directly support the book's introductory mission,
particularly the cases in which established scholars have contributed
essays that either summarize and build upon the research agendas with
which they are readily identified, or offer clear introductions to
important topics. Michael Austin's comprehensive taxonomy of "Music
Games" (chapter 9) is one such example, carefully chronicling the many
subgenres of music games, the most mainstream of which (*Guitar Hero*
and *Dance Dance Revolution*) effectively gave music scholars the ludic
foothold needed to launch the very discipline of ludomusicology.{% include footnote.html footnote_number='2' footnote_text=footnote_2%}
Mark Grimshaw-Aagaard's "Sound and Presence in Computer Games and Other
Worlds" (chapter 15) effectively synthesizes some of the author's own
prior research, while incorporating new insights from cognitive
neuroscience, and Guy Michelmore offers a primer on "The Process of
Creating Game Music" (chapter 4) from the inception of a project,
through composition, recording, release, and promotion.

Readers interested in music theory and analysis will find very few
chapters that engage with conventional analytical methodologies. In
fact, a skeptical reader might wonder, "why is a book like this being
reviewed in a venue such as *Theory & Practice*?" There are many ways to
answer that question, not least the fact that music theoretical research
always benefits from taking new perspectives and new repertoires into
account. My own preferred answer would highlight that many of *CCVGM*'s
best contributions are inspirationally interdisciplinary, offering both
an object lesson and an opportunity to music theorists. Just as scholars
like Scott Murphy and Frank Lehman have shown that Hollywood film music
is both the *ne plus ultra* of expressive and hermeneutically rich
chromaticism *and* a useful whetstone upon which structural and
interpretive theories of the same can be honed,{% include footnote.html footnote_number='3' footnote_text=footnote_3%} contributions like
Michiel Kamp's "Autoethnography, Phenomenology, and Hermeneutics"
(chapter 10) show how richly games and game studies can contribute to
music theory and musicology's evergreen debates over topics such as
formalism and the nature of musical narrative. Reading the volume from a
theoretical perspective, James Newman's "Early Video Game Music and
Technology" (chapter 1) demonstrates how delicately game scholars must
balance the intertwining influences of software, hardware, and musical
creativity, and is thus in close dialogue with recent approaches to
analysis, performance, and instrumentality.

Steven Reale's chapter on "Analytical Traditions and Game Music"
(chapter 12) stands alone with regard to established music-analytical
systems, presenting creative re-imaginings of Formenlehre, Schenkerian
analysis, and Neo-Riemannian theory using case studies on
situation-specific soundtrack variations, Nintendo's trademark
musicalized sound effects, and musical and spatial mappings in the
popular game *Super Mario Galaxy* (2007).{% include footnote.html footnote_number='4' footnote_text=footnote_4%} But numerous chapters are
involved with the act of analysis more broadly construed, and even more
involve theory-adjacent interdisciplinary connections. For instance,
after a primer on the ideas of Charles Sanders Peirce, Iain Hart's
"Semiotics in Game Music" (chapter 13) relies extensively on analysis to
underscore its arguments about thematic and orchestrational variations
across a game franchise, and it employs both conventional transcriptions
and a waveform-based analysis. Other chapters illustrate the porous
border between music and sound that has characterized video game audio
for its entire existence. Drawing on insights from both music cognition
and non-musical studies of subjective involvement in games, Dana Plank's
"A Cognitive-Emotional Approach to Game Sound" (chapter 16) skillfully
weaves together the musical-by-necessity sound effects of the Nintendo
Entertainment System (think of the fanciful upward "swoop" that
accompanies Mario jumping in the air{% include footnote.html footnote_number='5' footnote_text=footnote_5%}) with momentary musical cues
(treasure "chimes" and the sound of the game clock running down) and
traditional musical underscoring to propose a theory of sonic-emotional
involvement in games.

The book is not without its flaws, most notably in how its scholarly
apparatus fails to deliver on its promise of "summarizing existing
knowledge" in the field (4)---arguably, an important goal of any
scholarly handbook. *CCVGM* features only a "Select Bibliography" of
three pages, covering the entire volume; it could easily have been
thirty. Individual chapters often feature only short lists of "Further
Reading," generally numbering in the single digits. Some have no
reference lists at all. This unfortunately belies the rich and frequent
citations that are found in the footnotes of each chapter; within each
essay, references abound, but they are never collated for the reader.
(The index, thankfully, is fairly comprehensive.) The omission of
organized reference lists is likely an unfortunate decision from the
publisher to save pages, also unfortunately a common occurrence in
recent essay collections.{% include footnote.html footnote_number='6' footnote_text=footnote_6%} Moreover, the "Select Bibliography" is
devoted solely to ludomusicological scholarship; the exclusion of
interdisciplinary resources is a disappointing omission when a fuller
Works Cited list might have highlighted the methodological omnivory of
the collection's many vibrant intellectual conversations.{% include footnote.html footnote_number='7' footnote_text=footnote_7%} Absent too
is any sort of "ludography"---a list of games cited---a bibliographic
form which has become commonplace within the discipline (it is a
fixture, for instance, in the *Journal of Sound and Music in Games*).

One might wish for a few more citational connections *between* chapters
as well, as there is sometimes the effect of parallel monologues where
there ought to be dialogue. The volume generally lacks cross-references
between chapters, and while the introductions to each section are free
of the stilted chapter-by-chapter summaries so often found in the
introductions to essay collections and special journal issues, there is
also a lost opportunity to highlight connections---and
contradictions---between the larger ideas being raised by different
contributors. Game audio director Rob Bridgett (chapter 7, 111) and
music theorist Elizabeth Medina-Gray (chapter 11, 176), for instance,
propose precisely the same tripartite division of videogame soundscapes
into dialogue, sound effects, and music, just a few chapters apart
(albeit with different rhetorical goals). Chapter 3 is an interview with
Japanese game composer Junko Ozawa, who wrote music for *Galaga 3*
(1984), *The Tower of Druaga* (1984/85), and *Donkey Konga* (2003),
among others; it sheds new light on familiar narratives of early game
composition, including Ozawa's early training, the creative and
technical demands of early game composition, and the cultural impact of
game music in Japan---and it offers a woman's perspective that is too
often absent from such histories. Readers interested to know more about
the role of women in the early history of game music might want to flip
ahead to chapter 21 to read Andrew Lemon and Hildegonda Reitveld's
contribution, "Female Credit: Excavating Recognition for the Capcom
Sound Team," which offers a detailed account of some of Ozawa's precise
contemporaries (including Yoko Shimomura, Harumi Fujita, and Junko
Tamiya) and their work for a rival company. A more obvious editorial
hand might also have helped to draw into productive focus the tensions
that occasionally arise between contributions. For instance, only a few
dozen pages after the editors argue that the distinct technical features
and musical demands of game music serve as important markers of its
distinction from film music (59), Bridgett (chapter 7) asserts precisely
the opposite, writing that a "mature" and aesthetically sophisticated
soundtracking process aspires towards the condition of cinema in both
form (based on short, discrete cues rather than continuous music that
reacts to the player's actions) and content (focused on delivering
narrative information and heightening emotional impact, rather than any
of the interactive roles music can play).

While some of the territory covered by *CCVGM* may seem well-trodden by
now---how many more accounts of chiptune are needed?---many of the
volume's contributions successfully show that there is still more work
to be done even within the discipline's most thoroughly worn grooves.
James Newman's (chapter 1) critique of both technological determinism
and teleological history in accounts of early game music is fresh and
incisive, calling scholars toward greater methodological rigor. Melanie
Fritsch (chapter 14) provides a detailed and nuanced framework for
integrating insights from performance studies into the study of game
sound. And many contributions open up previously unexplored areas within
game music. William Gibbons's chapter on "Globalization, Localization,
and Video Game Music" (chapter 20), for instance, engages non-musical
scholarship on games to study the nuances of music in localization
(adapting aspects of a game for international markets, as when a game
developed in Japan is released in Europe or America, or vice versa).

Even the collection's few omissions are instructive. The volume
generally neglects the early history and "pre-history" of game sound.
The Atari VCS, for instance---a home console that dominated the market
from 1977 until the notorious "crash" of 1983---appears only in a single
chapter (chapter 1), and neither arcade games nor pinball machines
appear in the book at all. While the latter case is perhaps less
surprising---*video* game is right there in the title, after all---it is
a striking feature of such an otherwise comprehensive volume, and
perhaps an indication of shifting priorities within the field that the
first decade of game sound and music is mostly ignored. The second
decade fares no better, as games and systems from the 1980s through the
early 1990s feature in only a few chapters: The Nintendo Entertainment
System (NES) and Sega's Master System and Genesis/Mega Drive play a
starring role in Newman's aforementioned historiography of what we might
call the "programmable sound generator" era; the original *The Legend of
Zelda* appears as an initial subject of analysis in Plank's contribution
(chapter 16); and contributions by Medina-Gray (chapter 11) and James
Cook (chapter 19) show that there is still much to be learned about the
musical and sonic techniques that formed the foundation of important
game design techniques like abstract or representational dialogue and
contributed to the entire aesthetic edifice of 8- and 16-bit games, the
visual and sonic styles of which remain ubiquitous and influential
today. To be clear, it is not as if early game audio has not been
explored and documented; numerous valuable historical and analytical
treatments exist. It is merely striking that such a large volume spends
so little time on historical games, when the extensive and underexplored
back catalogues of such early systems mean that there are many more
interesting insights and object lessons to be found.{% include footnote.html footnote_number='8' footnote_text=footnote_8%}

Fortunately, the space that isn't devoted to the 1970s through early 90s
*is* productively filled with a cross-section of contemporary games that
includes both contemporary blockbusters (such as *Halo, The Elder
Scrolls, The Last of Us*) and long-running disciplinary-favorite
franchises (*Super Mario Bros.*, *The Legend of Zelda*, *Final Fantasy*,
and *Civilization*). There are only a few mentions of mobile or "casual"
games (another genre, often ignored, under whose many thousands of
examples interested scholars could easily find themselves buried) such
as *Plants vs. Zombies* and the *Candy Crush* series. K. J. Donnelly's
stellar essay on "The Triple Lock of Synchronization" (chapter 10) is
one example of theoretical research that manages to integrate insights
from computing, design, and the player's experience (not to mention from
Donnelly's extensive prior work on synchronization in film sound) and
applies them to blockbusters and mobile games alike. Notably, there
continues to be a need for more exploration of music and sound in
independent and experimental games, a topic that appears frequently
enough in ludomusicology conferences but is sparsely represented here
(and elsewhere in print).

The representation of indie games in *CCVGM*, however, brings me to one
of the book's strongest selling points: a series of contributions
written by or featuring interviews with practicing game industry
professionals. Ben Babbitt's (chapter 8) first-hand account of creating
the music for the indie darling *Kentucky Route Zero* (released serially
from 2013 to 2020) shows how valuable it can be to bring the creative
insights of thoughtful game composers into academic venues, especially
those whose aesthetic sensibilities present a clear counter-narrative to
the "big studio" perspectives often heard.{% include footnote.html footnote_number='9' footnote_text=footnote_9%} In fact, the
contributions from composers are a notable and unique selling point for
the book. As might be expected, these insights range from practical
advice learned through years of high-level industry work to personal
insights that are rarely found in scholarly approaches to game music.
For the former, see Bridgett's contribution, which is clear-eyed about
the challenges of creating music for a product whose final form is even
less fixed than a film-in-progress (chapter 7), and Thomas Böcker's
(chapter 24) account of the entrepreneurial skills required to stage
events like the Symphonic Game Music Concerts and the acclaimed *Final
Symphony* (2013). Examples of personal compositional insight include
Ozawa's account of her traditional conservatory education in the
aforementioned interview (chapter 3) and Babbitt's tales of working as
part of a three-person team on *Kentucky Route Zero*, which resulted in
a close entwinement of music, narrative, design, and programming.

Stepping back, *CCVGM* gives a clear and relatively comprehensive
picture of the discipline of ludomusicology. And these insights from
those who make the games that ludomusicologists study help *CCVGM*
capture the field of video game music studies at its interdisciplinary
best---a space characterized by the intersection of theory and practice,
of academic study and performance, of criticism and creation---and to
promote this dynamism even further. As music theorists continue to
imagine all the sonic worlds music theory might be able to study, and
the infinite ways music can be understood, they just might find in
ludomusicology a cognate discipline grasping at some of the very same
questions---with a few answers to share as well.
</section>

<section id="works-cited" markdown="1" >

<h2>Works Cited</h2>

{% include citations.html %}

</section>

