---
layout: article
volume: Volume 38, June 2024
title: "Form, Tonality, and Influence in Eric Ewazen's Sonata No. 1 for Flute and Piano"
author: "Samantha Inman"
abstract: "The attraction of music by Eric Ewazen (b. 1954) partially stems from
the expressive interweaving of multiple nineteenth- and
twentieth-century influences. Part I of this article documents how the
form and tonality of Ewazen's sonatas draw on aspects of classicism,
romanticism, impressionism, folk song, Americana, rock, and even film.
Part II analyzes Sonata No. 1 for Flute and Piano. While all three
movements invoke traditional formal types, each embraces a fluid
approach to tonality at the small and large scale. The first and third
movements resolve the main conflict through modal transformation in the
coda. The second embraces the simple idea of two perfect fifths as the
generator of motive, progression, and tonal centers. The second and the
third share sonorities and motives. This analysis documents aspects of
the style of one significant living composer, contributing to study of
the form and tonality of contemporary art music."
footnote_1: "Even notable exceptions such as Harrison 2016 and Lam 2019 focus on the nineteenth century and the first half of the twentieth, leaving much room for work on more recent repertoire." 
footnote_2: "Ewazen's popularity partially stems from his emphasis on accessibility for performer and audience, his concern for using each instrument to its best advantage, and his attention to instruments that welcome new repertoire, particularly winds and brass; see Pettit (2003, 34--35) and Brown (2009, 137). While writings on his music include a handful of DMA documents and abundant interviews, analyses of his works have yet to appear in professional music theory venues. This paucity of analyses may partially stem from the fact that, as Ryan Anthony observes, \"[m]uch of Ewazen's music looks easy and less sophisticated than it proves to be\" (Pettit 2003, 38)." 
footnote_3: "HipBoneMusic (2017, 24:00--24:55). For a works list, see the \"Music\" page of Ewazen's website: <https://www.ericewazen.com/themusic.php>." 
footnote_4: "Borrowing Ian Bates' general definition, \"tonality\" in this article denotes \"a scale with identifiable tonic from which melodic and harmonic materials are derived\" (2012, 35, fn 9)." 
footnote_5: "Thus, Ewazen's view of \"tonality\" aligns with Ian Bates' (2012) definition mentioned above. For a summary of the numerous other ways the term has been used over the centuries, see Hyer (2001)." 
footnote_6: "His mother was Polish, and his father was Ukrainian. References to his father's interest in Ukrainian dancing are ubiquitous in Ewazen's interviews, including Brown (2009, 138) and HipBoneMusic (2017, 3:35--4:28)." 
footnote_7: "Ewazen also frequently mentions his teachers as major influences. These include professors Joseph Schwanter, Samuel Adler, Warren Benson, and Eugene Kurtz at Eastman; Gunther Schuller at Tanglewood; and Milton Babbitt at Juilliard. See McNally (2008, 2--10) for a discussion of Ewazen's formative years." 
footnote_8: "Interestingly, Ewazen mentions this when discussing the admiration of Brahms held by Milton Babbitt, one of Ewazen's teachers (HipBoneMusic 2017, 11:33--12:10). Occasionally, the emulation extends past general features. For example, Ewazen consciously modeled his Trio for Trumpet, Violin, and Piano after Brahms' Horn Trio (Altman 2005, 88)." 
footnote_9: "To be fair, not even eighteenth-century works always follow this fuzzy principle, as Hepokoski (2002) illustrates. The point remains that the twentieth and twenty-first centuries illustrate widely divergent ideas of what can constitute a sonata. For instance, Thomas Schmidt-Beste (2011, 157--172) identifies multiple streams in the twentieth century: neo-romanticist, neo-classicist, a return to a \"generic piece for instrument(s),\" and the eclectic sonata. Even each general category envelops divergent features that resist tidy generalizations." 
footnote_10: "For further information on Schubert's approach to sonata form, see Webster (1978)." 
footnote_11: "For a discussion of octatonic passages in Ewazen's Sonata for Trumpet and Piano, see McNally (2008, 37--54)." 
footnote_12: "This serves as a particular example of what Peter Kaminsky (2011, 108) describes as Ravel's penchant for \"*minimal* compositional materials serving in *maximal* formal/structural contexts.\"" 
footnote_13: "Page (1986, 14), as quoted in McNally (2008, 13)." 
footnote_14: "Bates (2012, Examples 9­--10, 39). Subsequent charts in this article adopt Bates's practice of indicating a tonality based on a capital letter representing tonic and a subscript letter indicating mode. This requires using Ionian instead of major and Aeolian rather than minor (regardless of the presence of the leading tone)." 
footnote_15: "For Ewazen's account of his early exposure to rock, see Altman (2005, 164--166)." 
footnote_16: "Snedecker (2001, 33) is quoting Ewazen here. For further comments on how Ewazen's wide voicing recalls that of Aaron Copland, see Pettit (2003, 32) and Brown (2009, 138). For a comparison of the opening trumpet lines of Copland's *Quiet City* and Ewazen's *...to cast a shadow again*, see Altman (2005, 23)." 
footnote_17: "Ewazen's Sonata for Trumpet and Piano similarly opens with quartal/quintal harmony (McNally 2008, 19)." 
footnote_18: "Lehman's list (2018, xiv) includes categories such as modal cadence, chromatic cadence, and chromatically modulating cadence." 
footnote_19: "For descriptions of his collaborative process, see Brown (2009, 141--142)." 
footnote_20: "McNally (2008, 7) provides an example from Ewazen's composition lessons: \"While teaching in a contemporary style, Adler would use analysis of traditional scores of Haydn and others to demonstrate compositional structure.\"" 
footnote_21: "These examples adopt the nomenclature and presentation of Bates 2012." 
footnote_22: "Figure 1.5 of Caplin (2009, 38) contains a useful chart summarizing the tight-knit versus loose continuum. For more detailed discussion, see Chapter 8 (\"Subordinate Theme\") and Chapter 9 (\"Transition\") of Caplin (1998)." 
footnote_23: "The first movement of Ewazen's Sonata for Trumpet and Piano similarly develops all themes from the exposition (McNally 2008, 30)." 
footnote_24: "The relationships described in this paragraph could more formally be represented with four types of transformations from Julian Hook (2008, 142). A signature transformation shows sharpwise (s~n~) or flatwise (f~n~) moves around the circle of fifths. Diatonic transposition is indicated via lower case (t~n~), and chromatic transposition is indicated via upper case (T~n~). The motion of the piano part between sections could be described as s~2~t~6~ from exposition to development and s~1~t~6~ from development to recapitulation. The four-note motive moves by t~5~ within the exposition and by T~2~ from the start of the exposition to the start of the development." 
footnote_25: "The first movement of the Sonata for Trumpet and Piano provide a different strategy towards recapitulatory design by combining the tonality and harmonies from the main theme with the rhythmic motive from the subordinate theme (McNally 2008, 33)." 
footnote_26: "Ewazen avoids tonal closure without connoting the negative valance of what Sonata Theory describes as \"failed\" recapitulations (Hepokosi and Darcy 2006, 242--249)." 
footnote_27: "The notations follow common practice: parentheses indicate set classes, angle brackets mark contour segments, and square brackets mark interval vectors. For lists of relevant sources, see Straus (2016, 93--94 and 157)." 
footnote_28: "See chapter 14 of Hepokoski and Darcy (2006, 306--317)." 
footnote_29: "As Altman (2005, 14) notes, \"Ewazen's music deserves to be studied because it has been of great interest to so many performers and listeners.\"" 
---

<section markdown="1" >

<h2>Introduction</h2>

Tonal contemporary art music has received little attention from musice
theorists despite its popularity with performers and audiences.{%- include footnote.html footnote_number='1' footnote_text=page.footnote_1 -%} This
category includes works by Eric Ewazen (b. 1954), an American based in
New York City praised for his "approachable, cosmopolitan style" (Brown
2009, 140).{% include footnote.html footnote_number='2' footnote_text=page.footnote_2%} His output divides almost evenly into programmatic and
non-programmatic works. The latter includes compositions in traditional
genres such as concertos and sonatas.{%- include footnote.html footnote_number='3' footnote_text=page.footnote_3 -%}Much of the fascination of his
music stems from deft interweaving of techniques garnered from a wide
array of nineteenth- and twentieth-century styles into his own
recognizable voice.

Selecting one work as a case study, this article examines influences on
form and tonality in Ewazen's Sonata No. 1 for Flute and Piano.{%- include footnote.html footnote_number='4' footnote_text=page.footnote_4 -%}The
composition was written for Marya Martin in 2010 and premiered in 2011.
In his preface, Ewazen (2011) notes the piece is "designed in the great
tradition of late 19th century instrumental sonatas." Motivic
development plays a large role in this work, in keeping with that
legacy. Some aspects of large-scale form likewise reflect classical and
romantic models: the three movements are in sonata, ternary, and
five-part rondo form respectively. The tonal designs within these
frameworks, however, reflect more recent models. Modal mixture pervades
the work, invoking not only major and minor but also many diatonic
modes. His harmonic language reflects the influence of folksong,
impressionism, film, and pop/rock. Sections and even movements no longer
rely on principles of tonal closure, forging other means of crafting
tonal narrative.

Such convergence of diverse elements demands an eclectic analytic
approach. Part I of this article establishes context, identifying
Ewazen's main influences and the corresponding tools for analysis. Part
II of this article analyzes each movement of Sonata No. 1 for Flute and
Piano in turn. The attraction of Ewazen's music---as with other
contemporary tonal music---partially stems from the expressive
interweaving of multiple nineteenth- and twentieth-century influences,
as Ewazen's style in general and this sonata in particular illustrate.

</section>

<section markdown="1">

<h2>Part I: Context and Approach</h2>

<div class="epigraph">
<blockquote>
<p>I have really embraced tonality as my main voice. I always have tonal
centers, and somewhat traditional harmonic progressions, although this
is filtered through a world of modal music, and the utilization of all
those early 20th century scales such as the pentatonic and octatonic.
I don't use key signatures, which allows a freedom of movement from
key to key, but there is always a tonal center to my music. . . . I
have used atonality, but I use it more for effect or for passages that
require a certain amount of intensity. . . . My meters tend to be
along the lines of the early 20th century composers---often stable,
but sometimes using mixed meters as well.</p>
<footer> (Ewazen in Madden 2002,
139--140)</footer>
</blockquote>
</div>

Ewazen's summary above highlights several characteristics of his
writing. First, his conception of tonality entails hierarchic stability
around a single local pitch within a scale. This may or may not entail
functional progressions and may or may not venture beyond major and
minor scales to include diatonic modes and other recognized collections
including pentatonic, octatonic, and whole tone.{%- include footnote.html footnote_number='5' footnote_text=page.footnote_5 -%} Second, forgoing
the use of key signatures facilitates rapid and frequent changes between
tonalities, which may alter the tonic pitch, the collection of pitches,
and/or the rotation of the pitch collection. Third, truly atonal
passages, which obscure any sense of a reference pitch, rarely surface
in his music. Fourth, meter is nearly always clearly articulated,
regardless of whether the passage features only a simple or compound
meter or entails complex or changing meters. Fast movements frequently
feature shifting meters and a rhythmic vitality Ewazen attributes to the
Eastern European folk tunes he learned as a child from his immigrant
parents.{%- include footnote.html footnote_number='6' footnote_text=page.footnote_6 -%}

Most of these musical traits appear in the works of composers from
decades or even centuries prior, as Ewazen has readily acknowledged in
numerous interviews. As Sigrun B. Heinzelmann (2011, 143) observes of
Ravel, Ewazen seems to be a "composer arguably with little overt
'anxiety of influence.'" [Example 1](#ex-1) sorts some of the
specific nineteenth- and early-twentieth-century composers Ewazen
admires based on style.{%- include footnote.html footnote_number='7' footnote_text=page.footnote_7 -%}The remainder of this section considers
portions of this list as well as the additional contributions of rock
and film. The diverse influences on Ewazen's approach to form, tonality,
and harmony require equally diverse analytic tools to highlight the
joyous subtleties of his music.

{% include center_column_img.html src='assets/articles/inman/img/ex_1.png' img_size='60' fig_num='1' fig_caption='Nineteenth- and twentieth-century composers Ewazen cites as influences.'%}

Many aspects of Ewazen's style reference the eighteenth and nineteenth
centuries, including elements of form, melody, and motivic development.
As Evan Feldman (2015) observes, Ewazen's "neo-classical sensibilities
are reflected in a fondness for symmetrical forms, sonata-allegro
movements, and classical titles. He expresses his neo-romanticism in
rich harmonies and a theatrical sense of pacing." While indebted to
Beethoven, Ewazen identifies Brahms as his favorite composer, preferring
some of the same traits.{%- include footnote.html footnote_number='8' footnote_text=page.footnote_8 -%}References to traditional forms are common
in Ewazen's music, including the practice of setting the first movement
in a multi-movement work as a sonata (Arnone 2016, 32). Ewazen "is
especially gifted in the area of writing memorable melodies that unfold
organically," often with tight motivic cohesion (Brown 2009, 137). As
Timothy Altman (2005, 136) highlights, "Ewazen's music is often
cyclical. Tonalities, melodies, motives, and rhythms often recur later
in the subsequent movements of the same work, giving the listener a
sense of unity."

Given the neo-romantic and/or neo-classical bent of Ewazen's sonatas,
recent *Formenlehre* provides applicable analytic tools. William
Caplin's (1998; 2009) ideas of formal functions, temporal functions, and
the continuum of tight-knit versus loose thematic design prove
particularly useful. Occasionally, concepts from James Hepokoski and
Warren Darcy's (2006) Sonata Theory apply, though to a lesser degree due
to the modest role of thematic rotation and cadences (especially PACs)
in Ewazen's sonata-form movements. Both sets of tools require flexible
implementation, as Ewazen's approach to form exceeds classical and
romantic models in straying from what Edward T. Cone (1968, 76--77)
calls the "Sonata principle," which "requires that important statements
made in a key other than the tonic must either be re-stated in the
tonic, or brought into a closer relation with the tonic, before the
movement ends."{%- include footnote.html footnote_number='9' footnote_text=page.footnote_9 -%}

One of the largest differences in common-practice sonatas and Ewazen's
sonatas revolves around large-scale tonal closure. Both Caplin and
Sonata Theory assume tonal closure typical of eighteenth-century works.
In Ewazen's output, however, neither individual movements nor entire
works are obligated to start and end in the same tonality, though they
may occasionally. For instance, Altman (2005, 18) notes that while each
of the eight movements of the chamber work *. . . to cast a shadow
again* starts and ends in different tonalities, the complete work starts
and ends in C<span style="font-family:music;">#</span> minor. The fourth movement of that work constitutes a
modified ternary, placing the A′ in a different key from that of A
(Altman 2005, 51). Joseph McNally III (2008, 34) identifies one
motivation for this design: Ewazen "stated that he often does not end in
the same key the work or movement begins to hold the interest of the
audience." Naturally, this requires radical adjustments to understanding
the role tonality plays in the narrative of Ewazen's compositions.

Such aspects of Ewazen's large-scale tonal design find precedent in
works by Maurice Ravel. Heinzelmann provides detailed analyses of two
applicable examples. In the first movement of the String Quartet
(1902--1903), the setting of the secondary theme in the submediant key
softens any sense of conflict with the main theme, as in the older
precedents in Schubert (2011, 144--159).{%- include footnote.html footnote_number='10' footnote_text=page.footnote_10 -%}Ravel's Piano Trio (1914)
departs more radically from tonal norms (2011, 160--172). The exposition
starts and ends in the same key, introducing both the primary and
secondary themes in A minor. Conversely, the movement ends in C major,
thus drastically delaying the most typical secondary key to avoid
large-scale tonal closure. As Heinzelmann (2011, 173) summarizes, "Ravel
entices us to hear and accept the movement as a (double-rotational)
sonata form when at the same time he withholds the most central tenet of
the sonata principle: the tonic return." Similarly, Ewazen often evokes
sonata form while avoiding tonal norms, most often impacting the
movement's end.

On a smaller scale, Ewazen's ephemeral shifts between scalar collections
recall those of the impressionists, including Ravel as well as Claude
Debussy. Most local passages are based on a particular scale or blend of
two scales with the same starting pitch, most frequently two modes with
adjacent key signatures (like Dorian and Phrygian) or a more thorough
mixture of major and minor. Diatonic collections are most frequent,
though other collections surface occasionally.{%- include footnote.html footnote_number='11' footnote_text=page.footnote_11 -%} [Example 2](#ex-2) shows a phrase from the second movement of Ewazen's
Sonata for Trumpet and Piano, which moves through two different diatonic
collections and an octatonic collection. Precedents for this appear
throughout impressionist compositions, including select movements in
sonata form. Resembling aspects of Ravel's String Quartet mentioned
above, the first movement of Ewazen's trumpet sonata navigates F major,
its relative D minor, both whole-tone collections, and all three
octatonic collections. Transformations of themes p1 and p2 emphasize
some of these scalar shifts (2011, 144--59).{%- include footnote.html footnote_number='12' footnote_text=page.footnote_12 -%}Andrew Aziz (2020)
likewise notes scalar shifts in numerous French sonata-form works,
including *En blanc et noir* and *L'Isle joyeuse* by Debussy as well as
the third movement of the Sonatine and "Ondine" from *Gaspard de la
nuit* by Ravel. Such French models prove influential on Ewazen.

{% include center_column_img.html src='assets/articles/inman/img/ex_2.png' img_size='60' fig_num='2' fig_caption='Collection shifts and repetition in Ewazen, Sonata for Trumpet and Piano/II.'%}


Given Ewazen's "folkish, Vaughan-Williams-like use of modes,"{%- include footnote.html footnote_number='13' footnote_text=page.footnote_13 -%}
scholarly work on Ralph Vaughan Williams is also relevant. In his
analyses of multiple modal works by Vaughan Williams, Ian Bates
introduces both definitions and visual representations useful for
approaching music that entails frequent tonal shifts involving more than
one mode. As he notes, tonality entails "three diatonic domains: key
signature, scale type, and tonic . . . . \[A\]ny diatonic relationships
within a work always require variation in at least two of the three
domains" (2012, 35). [Example 3](#ex-3) shows his Table of
Diatonic Relations, which elegantly represents relations between the
three domains. Members of a column share a key signature, members of a
row share a mode, and members of a rising diagonal line share a tonic
pitch. The shaded regions show all "diatonic tonalities related by fixed
domain to D~D~" (D Dorian).{%- include footnote.html footnote_number='14' footnote_text=page.footnote_14 -%}In subsequent analyses in the article,
Bates marks the starting tonality of a passage with a dot, traces
"trajectories" using arrows, and shades "trajectory systems." Diatonic
trajectories are "directed relationships between tonalities immediately
following one another in a given passage of music" (Bates 2012, 37). A
trajectory system arises "\[w\]hen two or more trajectories are related
to one another by fixed domain because they share a particular domain
conflict" (Bates 2012, 40). Tracing relationships on such a table proves
useful in examining the fluctuations of tonality that pervade much of
Ewazen's music.

{% include center_column_img.html src='assets/articles/inman/img/ex_3.png' fig_num='3' fig_caption='Diatonic tonalities related by fixed domain to D Dorian on
the Table of Diatonic Relations (Bates 2012, 39, Ex. 10).'%}



Rock music has also influenced Ewazen's approach to modes and
sonorities. His interest in the genre dates to at least his high school
years when he composed a rock musical entitled *Apocalypse* (McNally
2008, 4). He notes, "the modality of rock music is something that
attracted me to it" (Altman 2005, 100). Indeed, rock commonly features
both changes of mode between sections as well as modal mixture within a
section, as has been well documented by Walter Everett (2004), Nicole
Biamonte (2010), Brett Clement (2013, 2019), Brad Osborn (2017), and
David Temperley (2018), among others. Ewazen's music contains numerous
similar passages blending or juxtaposing modes. As David Temperley
(2018, 43) notes, rock overwhelmingly features root-position chords.
Ewazen's chords likewise tend to be in root position, which clarifies
the role of added tones when present and lends a rock quality to some
passages.{%- include footnote.html footnote_number='15' footnote_text=page.footnote_15 -%}For example, the passage from the Sonata for Horn and
Piano in [Example 4](#ex-4) contains exclusively root-position
major and minor triads voiced with parallel fifths in the left hand of
the piano.

{% include center_column_img.html src='assets/articles/inman/img/ex_4.png' img_size='60' fig_num='4' fig_caption='Root-position triads in Ewazen, Sonata for Horn and Piano/III.'%}


Ewazen's sonorities also reflect elements associated with
twentieth-century American composers. His preference for wide spacing
and textural clarity reflects "the 'Americana' sound of composers such
as Copland, Barber, Schuman, Bernstein, and Gershwin."{%- include footnote.html footnote_number='16' footnote_text=page.footnote_16 -%}Sonorities
are often, but not always, tertian. Chords built from fifths appear with
some frequency. For example, Ewazen's Sonata No. 2 for Flute and Piano
opens with quartal/quintal harmony as shown in [Example
5](ex-5).{%- include footnote.html footnote_number='17' footnote_text=page.footnote_17 -%}This passage also exemplifies the tonic pedal
common in Ewazen's opening passages, here anchoring C Aeolian. Even
chords that are basically tertian frequently feature added tones. As
Altman (2005, 135) notes, "added seconds, fourths, and sixths are used
in addition to dyads, triads, seventh chords, and other extended
chords."

{% include center_column_img.html src='assets/articles/inman/img/ex_5.png' img_size='60' fig_num='5' fig_caption='Quartal/quintal harmonies and pedal tone in Ewazen, Sonata No. 2 for Flute and Piano/I.'%}


While Ewazen does not cite specific film or video game composers,
aspects of Ewazen's use of modes and cadential structure embrace
techniques common in those genres. Indeed, music from film and video
games colors associations of specific modes and modal harmonies, some of
which influence Ewazen's music. Focusing on John Williams, Tom Schneller
(2015, 51--52) identifies mixture progressions that entail diatonic
modes beyond major and minor:

> In major keys, Williams frequently replaces diatonic minor and
> diminished chords with major triads borrowed from the Aeolian,
> Mixolydian, Lydian, or Phrygian modes . . . . The elimination of minor
> and diminished triads results in a major key on steroids---a simple
> but effective procedure in heroic passages of Williams' film and
> ceremonial music.

Providing numerous examples from Williams and earlier film composers as
well as Aaron Copland, Schneller unpacks the extramusical associations
of specific progressions as summarized in [Example 6](#ex-6).
Ewazen employs saturation of major triads and some of these specific
progressions. [Example 7](#ex-7) illustrates both with an
excerpt from the third movement of Ewazen's Sonata for Euphonium and
Piano: the phrase uses exclusively major triads and ends with one of the
progressions from Example 6. Building on Schneller's work, Sean Atkinson
(2019) highlights the association of Lydian mode with the idea of
soaring in film and video game music. This sense of exuberant flight
inhabits Ewazen's Lydian passages as well, including the opening of the
first movement of Sonata No. 1 for Flute and Piano discussed in Part II.
Frank Lehman notes that the expanded harmonic palate of film music
requires an expansion of allowable cadence types. While differing in
detail, [Example 8](#ex-8) loosely adapts Lehman's chart (2018,
xiv) to catalogue conventional and unconventional cadences appearing in
the analysis of Ewazen's music below.{%- include footnote.html footnote_number='18' footnote_text=page.footnote_18 -%}

{% include center_column_img.html src='assets/articles/inman/img/ex_6.png' img_size='40' fig_num='6' fig_caption='Extra-musical associations of mixture progressions in the music of John Williams identified in Schneller 2013.'%}

As this section has shown, Ewazen's music draws on aspects of
classicism, romanticism, impressionism, folk song, Americana, rock, and
even film. Consequently, analyzing his music requires a similarly
eclectic array of analytic tools. Terminology from Caplin and Sonata
Theory proves useful when examining some aspects of form. Bates' Table
of Diatonic Relations aids in tracking Ewazen's frequent tonal shifts
that traverse some combination of tonal centers, modes, and collections.
Analyzing phrase structure requires considering an expanded list of
cadence types drawn from idioms common in film, among other genres. Each
of these tools plays a role in the analysis of Ewazen's Sonata No. 1 for
Flute and Piano in Part II.

{% include center_column_img.html src='assets/articles/inman/img/ex_7.png' img_size='60' fig_num='7' fig_caption='Major triads and modal mixture in Ewazen, Sonata for Euphonium and Piano/III.'%}

Before delving into the analytical details of that work, it might also
be worth asking why today's composers continue to write sonatas.
Plausible answers range from the pragmatic to the artistic. One reason
may simply be the nature of commissions, as some performers and
organizations are still interested in new sonatas featuring a particular
instrument. Indeed, the vast majority of Ewazen's sonatas were written
for a specific person.{%- include footnote.html footnote_number='19' footnote_text=page.footnote_19 -%}Another reason might be the influence of
training, as the typical music curriculum (including that of Eastman and
Juilliard, the schools Ewazen attended) includes extensive consideration
of formal processes and specific examples of sonata cycle works.{%- include footnote.html footnote_number='20' footnote_text=page.footnote_20 -%}
Remaking traditional forms in an updated musical language combines the
convenience of models with the weight of connecting to an extended
historical tradition. Some motivation might be due to the attractive
musical resources built into the sonata cycle itself, which balances
unity and contrast both within and between movements. Each of these
appears to motivate aspects of Ewazen's Sonata No. 1 for Flute and
Piano, as the analysis of individual movements below illustrates.

{% include center_column_img.html src='assets/articles/inman/img/ex_8.png' img_size='50' fig_num='8' fig_caption='Cadence types.'%}

</section>

<section markdown="1">

<h2>Part II: Analysis of Sonata No. 1 for Flute and Piano</h2>

<h3>Movement I: Allegro leggiero</h3>

In the sonata-form first movement, modes and motives surpass
conventional means of providing coherence and closure. Themes,
instrumentation, and degrees of stability anchor the abundant shifts in
tonality. [Example 9](#ex-9) provides a form diagram of the
movement. Conventional cadences are infrequent and relatively weak,
including mainly half and imperfect authentic types. Thematic return
articulates major boundaries in the form, as the main theme marks the
beginning of the exposition, development, recapitulation, and coda. The
exposition introduces three themes, all of which resurface in the
development. In contrast, the brief recapitulation excises the entire
transition and parts of the subordinate theme for a focused path toward
the coda.

{% include center_column_img.html src='assets/articles/inman/img/ex_9.png' img_size='50' fig_num='9' fig_caption='Form, Ewazen, Sonata No. 1 for Flute and Piano/I.'%}


The three portions of the exposition allow for three viable
interpretations in function. Instrumentation and texture assist in
articulating the beginning of each segment. The flute leads in the first
([Example 10](#ex-10a)) and second ([Example 11](#ex-11))
portions, whereas the piano emerges as the leading voice at the start of
the third ([Example 12](#ex-12)). All three sections feature
different patterns in the piano part. [Example 13](#ex-13)
compares three possible interpretations of these sections. The question
is whether there is a transition, a closing theme, or neither. Following
Caplin, the first two readings in Example 13 are plausible, but the
third is unlikely given the nature of the third segment (given the
restriction of C to codetta rhetoric). From a Sonata Theory perspective,
the first or the third readings are possible, though cadence types pose
problems to the third. Measure 34 could be read as a medial caesura (MC)
given the drop in energy immediately following the cadence, but the
deceptive cadence here would be an odd choice to articulate this
boundary (Example 9). The boundary between the second and third segments
functions even less convincingly as an EEC given the lack of PAC and the
change of key at the start of the third section. Tonal stability in the
exposition and thematic return in the recapitulation support the first
reading in Example 13, which corresponds to the more detailed reading in
Example 9.


{% include full_width_three_img.html 
src1='assets/articles/inman/img/ex_10a.png' fig_num1='10a' fig_caption1='Tonal trajectories in the exposition, Ewazen, Sonata No. 1 for Flute and Piano/I: Main theme (tightest)'
src2='assets/articles/inman/img/ex_10b.png' fig_num2='10b' fig_caption2='Tonal trajectories in the exposition, Ewazen, Sonata No. 1 for Flute and Piano/I: Transition (loosest)'
src3='assets/articles/inman/img/ex_10c.png' fig_num3='10c' fig_caption3='Tonal trajectories in the exposition, Ewazen, Sonata No. 1 for Flute and Piano/I: Transition (loosest)'
%}

The tonal stability of the three themes aligns with typical expectations
for tight-knit and loose passages, as demonstrated in [Example
14](#ex-14a).{%- include footnote.html footnote_number='21' footnote_text=page.footnote_21 -%}The main theme (Example 14a) is by far the most
stable, exploring only three tonalities, two sharing E<span style="font-family:music;">b</span> as tonic and two
sharing the Ionian mode. All three are present both in the first pass
through the theme starting in m. 1 and the compressed repeat starting in
m. 26. The transition (Example 14b) is far more mercurial, weaving
between distant tonalities roughly every four measures. This passage
loosens all three aspects of tonal relations with four modes, five
tonics, and five collections ranging from four flats to four sharps. The
subordinate theme (Example 14c) lies between these extremes, looser than
the main theme and tighter than the transition.{%- include footnote.html footnote_number='22' footnote_text=page.footnote_22 -%}While the
subordinate theme contains internal repetition like the main theme, it
places the second pass at m. 73 in a different tonality. Rather than
breaking from the tonalities of the main theme as would be typical for
older sonatas, this subordinate theme highlights two of the three
tonalities from the main theme. They even appear in the same order,
featuring E<span style="font-family:music;">b</span> Ionian at the subordinate theme's opening in m. 59 and C
Ionian at the repetition in m. 73.

{% include center_column_img.html 
src='assets/articles/inman/img/ex_11.png' fig_num='11' fig_caption='Exposition, transition, Ewazen, Sonata No. 1 for Flute and Piano/I.'
%}

The development, as expected, considerably loosens materials from the
exposition. All three thematic zones return, though not in a strict
rotation: most of the material derived from the subordinate theme enters
before material drawn from the transition.{%- include footnote.html footnote_number='23' footnote_text=page.footnote_23 -%}In contrast to the major
modes emphasized at the start of the exposition, the first two-thirds of
the development emphasizes minor modes. [Example 15](#ex-15)
shows the tonal trajectories of the development, highlighting the
presence of five modes, five pitch centers, and seven different
collections. Each individual tonality, however, relates to at least two
others through shared tonic, mode, or implied key signature, thus
balancing variety and cohesion.

{% include center_column_img.html src='assets/articles/inman/img/ex_12.png' img_size='60' fig_num='12' fig_caption='Exposition, subordinate theme, Ewazen, Sonata No. 1 for Flute and Piano/I.'%}
{% include center_column_img.html src='assets/articles/inman/img/ex_13.png' img_size='30' fig_num='13' fig_caption='Three readings of the exposition, Ewazen, Sonata No. 1 for Flute and Piano/I.'%}

When considering the movement as whole, the main and subordinate themes
articulate and ultimately resolve the central conflict, which revolves
around the pitches E<span style="font-family:music;">b</span> and C. The soaring main theme opens the work in E<span style="font-family:music;">b</span>
Lydian, with later passages shading into Ionian (Example 10). The bass
line alternates pedal tones on E<span style="font-family:music;">b</span> with those on C without seriously
challenging E<span style="font-family:music;">b</span> as the clear tonal center. In contrast, Example 12 shows
how the subordinate theme in the exposition intensifies the competition
between these two pitches through scalar shifts. The passage opens in E<span style="font-family:music;">b</span>
Ionian with a sentence that arrives on a half cadence in m. 68. The
second, longer continuation in F Aeolian ends with a half cadence on a C
major triad in m. 74. Measure 75 marks the climax of the theme with a
*forte* restatement of the basic idea in C Ionian. The subordinate theme
thus reaffirms the importance of E<span style="font-family:music;">b</span>, elevates the role of C, and
balances the main theme's Lydian pull with longer stretches in major.
The drastic shortening of the recapitulation focuses the tonal narrative
of the movement. As noted in Example 9, the slightly abbreviated main
theme is reworked to conclude in C Ionian. The compressed subordinate
theme remains in C Ionian throughout. The coda further affirms C through
one final modal shift, concluding in C Lydian.

{% include full_width_three_img.html 
src1='assets/articles/inman/img/ex_14a.png' fig_num1='14a' fig_caption1='Tonal trajectories in the exposition, Ewazen, Sonata No. 1 for Flute and Piano/I: Main theme (tightest)'
src2='assets/articles/inman/img/ex_14b.png' fig_num2='14b' fig_caption2='Tonal trajectories in the exposition, Ewazen, Sonata No. 1 for Flute and Piano/I: Transition (loosest)'
src3='assets/articles/inman/img/ex_14c.png' fig_num3='14c' fig_caption3='Tonal trajectories in the exposition, Ewazen, Sonata No. 1 for Flute and Piano/I: Subordinate theme' %}

The satisfying nature of this coda stems partially from transformations
of the main theme that span the entire movement. As introduced earlier,
Example 10 compares three significant iterations. The piano ostinato is
similar throughout, diatonically transposed for the development, and
transposed and embellished with sixteenths for the coda. Changes in the
flute are more subtle. Scale degree annotations above the flute part
highlight recurrences of a four-note motive (two ascending steps and a
downward leap). The exposition and development transpose at least the
first part of the motive down by two diatonic steps but involve
different starting scale degrees: <span style="font-family:music;">^3</span> to \^1 in the exposition and \^5
to \^<span style="font-family:music;">b</span>3 in the development. The second iteration in the development
widens the last interval to a fifth rather than the expected third, as
the upward bracket indicates. Downward brackets highlight the ascending
major second followed by minor second melodic opening to all three
sections, regardless of scale degrees. Significantly, the final
statement of this motive in the coda combines this
major-second/minor-second ascent from the exposition with the descending
perfect fifth from \^5 to \^1 of the development. The flute adds its
tonic pedal to that of the piano, reaching the final stage of closure.
This motivic synthesis thus brings the piece to rest in C Lydian,
combining the opening mode type with the pitch of the second pedal tone.
{%- include footnote.html footnote_number='24' footnote_text=page.footnote_24 -%}[Example 16](#ex-16) highlights how the loop from the
exposition's main theme is transformed into the directed motion from two
modes on E<span style="font-family:music;">b</span> to the same two modes on C in the recapitulation and
coda.{%- include footnote.html footnote_number='25' footnote_text=page.footnote_25 -%}

{% include center_column_img.html src='assets/articles/inman/img/ex_15.png' img_size='50' fig_num='15' fig_caption='Tonal trajectories in the development, Ewazen, Sonata No. 1 for Flute and Piano/I.'%}

{% include center_column_img.html src='assets/articles/inman/img/ex_16.png' img_size='25' fig_num='16' fig_caption='Tonal trajectories in the recapitulation and coda, Ewazen, Sonata No. 1 for Flute and Piano/I.'%}

All in all, this movement jettisons older conventions of sonata form
while crafting a compelling narrative reliant on pitch, modes, and
motives. Rather than introducing a new and crisp tonal contrast as in a
conventional exposition, the subordinate theme exaggerates and
transforms qualities already present in the main theme. Delicate shifts
in mode serve to color and shape transpositions of motives. The
recapitulation neither revisits most previous thematic material nor
concludes in the opening key, defying the traditional sonata
principle.{% include footnote.html footnote_number='Test' %} The movement starts and ends in different tonalities,
but the specific choice of ending tonal center and mode nevertheless
contributes to unity.

<h3>Movement II: Andante teneramente</h3>

The gorgeous slow movement exemplifies composing out in a modal context.
Much of the second movement derives from its opening motive, an
ascending fifth followed by a descending fourth. The innocuous gesture
immediately develops into the opening phrase. This influences the melody
and added-note harmony of subsequent sections, including the only theme
stated thrice in the movement. The pitches of the opening motive even
inform the large-scale tonal organization, determining the specific
pitch centers of the outer sections. The perfect fifth infiltrates
motive, harmony, and mode with only modest evocation of functional
norms.

[Example 17](#ex-17) shows how the hauntingly beautiful theme a
is largely generated from the pitches and contour of the first three
notes: D--A--E. Solid boxes mark the original and transposed version of
the motive, which involves set class (027) presented with the contour
\<021\>.{%- include footnote.html footnote_number='27' footnote_text=page.footnote_27 -%}Some modified restatements preserve set class while
changing contour. Sideways brackets show how the bass line of mm. 5--9
uses contour \<012\>, overtly stacking perfect fifths. Measures 7 and 9
preserve the pitch classes of the original, while the other iterations
involve transposition. Other instances of the motive preserve contour
but not set class: these include E--A--F, member of set class (015),
marked with dotted boxes and B--F--C, member of set class (016), marked
with upward brackets. Significantly, the pitches of the first two
statements of the motive, D--A--E and E--A--F, combine in m. 12, which
concludes the theme with a submediant cadence and establishes one of the
piano figurations that recurs frequently throughout the movement.

{% include center_column_img.html src='assets/articles/inman/img/ex_17.png' img_size='60' fig_num='17' fig_caption='Theme a, Ewazen, Sonata No. 1 for Flute and Piano/II.'%}


[Example 18](#ex-18) summarizes the relationships between these
cells. Comparing the interval vectors highlights how (015) and (016)
share ic1, and all four sets contain at least one instance of ic5. The
original (027) contains two instances, distilling the quartal/quintal
sound to a single trichord. The superset serving as the goal of the
introduction basically functions as a minor triad with an added second,
reflecting Ewazen's practice of adding subtle dissonance to basically
triadic structures.

{% include center_column_img.html src='assets/articles/inman/img/ex_18.png' fig_num='18' fig_caption='Set comparison, Ewazen, Sonata No. 1 for Flute and'%}

Piano/II.

Trading the delicate counterpoint of the opening for homophony, theme b
adopts aspects of the opening motive. The passage is fairly tight-knit,
containing two four-bar sentences as indicated in [Example
19](ex-19). The loosest aspect involves the shift in tonality
from D Dorian to A Aeolian. The first sentence opens with a basic idea
featuring the motive's original \<021\> contour, with the flute
beautifully lingering on the B-natural functioning as the Dorian color
tone on the downbeat of m. 14. The continuation melodicizes all four
pitches from the end of the introduction: D--E--F--A. The second
sentence lacks such specific motivic references but organically follows
the same general outline as the first sentence: a minimal basic idea, an
embellished basic idea, and a continuation leading to a clear cadence.
The harmony throughout the passage frequently features added note
chords. These include major and minor triads with an added second and a
minor triad with an added fourth. Significantly, each of these harmonies
contains (027). The figuration in the piano further emphasizes this
saturation of fourths, frequently isolating a fourth or fifth on a given
half beat. This passage thus solidifies the significance of the opening
motive as well as the general emphasis on fourths and fifths. Theme b
returns twice more in the work, serving as a significant anchor in this
narrative.

{% include center_column_img.html src='assets/articles/inman/img/ex_19.png' img_size='60' fig_num='19' fig_caption='Theme b, Ewazen, Sonata No. 1 for Flute and Piano/II.'%}


The diagram in [Example 20](#ex-20) compares two readings of the
large-scale form. Both the ternary and the five-part rondo
interpretations involve unusual proportions. In the ternary reading,
sections A and B are roughly fifty measures each, while the A′ section
is drastically shortened to sixteen measures. The five-part rondo
reading likewise seems lopsided, with episode 2 double the length of
episode 1 and nearly five times the length of the refrain.

{% include center_column_img.html src='assets/articles/inman/img/ex_20.png' img_size='60' fig_num='20' fig_caption='Form, Ewazen, Sonata No. 1 for Flute and Piano/II.'%}

The balance might tip in favor of the ternary reading when considering
tonal centers, particularly in relation to the opening motive. As shown
in Example 20, the tonal centers of mm. 1--54 unfold two complete cycles
through the pitches of the opening motive D--A--E. Most pitch centers
mix different flavors of minor modes, briefly brightening to Mixolydian
within theme e. [Example 21](#ex-21) highlights the proximity of
the tonalities; collections only range from one flat to one sharp, and
all tonalities are a single direct move away from either D Dorian or A
Aeolian (which are a single move from each other). The reversed
restatement of theme b and theme a at the end of the movement returns to
pitch centers D and A, though not E. Thus, all of the tonalities within
sections A and A′ center on one of the pitches from the opening D--A--E
motive. Section B touches on these centers at the beginning and end.
Furthermore, theme h and theme i are largely built on F, the note added
by the first variation of the opening motive: E--A--F. Section B
features pervasive, rapid mixture entailing more flats, with fleeting
implications of F Phrygian (5 flats) and a more extended passage in
A-flat Dorian and Aeolian (6--7 flats).

{% include center_column_img.html src='assets/articles/inman/img/ex_21.png' img_size='20' fig_num='21' fig_caption='Tonal trajectories in Section A, Ewazen, Sonata No. 1 for Flute and Piano/II.
'%}


Even the two portions of section B that are not built on a pitch from m.
1 allude to the opening motive. [Example 22](#ex-22) shows the
opening of theme g, featuring extensive modal mixture ranging from G
Mixolydian to G Aeolian. The bass line moves primarily by fifths or
fourths in yet another presentation of (027) from theme a. While
departing from the original set classes, the flute embraces the original
\<021\> contour for its commentary within each triad. Theme j similarly
revolves around motion by fifths, this time mixing modes with spellings
traversing A<span style="font-family:music;">b</span> and G<span style="font-family:music;">#</span>. As the reduction in [Example 23](#ex-23)
shows, mm. 87--90 move by descending fifths, while mm. 92--95 reverse to
ascending fifths. Added notes, extensive mixture, and the sudden shift
to the dominant of D at the end of the phrase separate this passage from
a typical sequence in the common-practice period.

{% include center_column_img.html src='assets/articles/inman/img/ex_22.png' fig_num='22' img_size='60' fig_caption='Episode 2, theme g, Ewazen, Sonata No. 1 for Flute and Piano/II.'%}


{% include center_column_img.html src='assets/articles/inman/img/ex_23.png' fig_num='23' img_size='60' fig_caption='Episode 2, reduction of theme j, Ewazen, Sonata No. 1 for Flute and Piano/II.'%}


The fascination of this movement stems from its exploration of
interlocking perfect fifths in a modal landscape. Most passages feature
a minor mode or extensive mixture of major and minor. Phrase endings
rely more often on note length, dynamics, harmonic rhythm, and change of
figuration than on conventional progressions, substituting motion from
mediant, submediant, or subtonic to the dominant at many cadences, as
shown in Example 20. This avoidance of V--I at phrase endings is
particularly noticeable given the saturation of root motion by fifth
elsewhere, both in local progressions and between pitch centers. Thus,
this movement brings a fresh sound to an old idea, unpacking three notes
a fifth apart through motive, harmony, and mode.

<h3>Movement III: Allegro giocoso</h3>

The third movement concludes the work with a fast rondo showcasing the
colors of the two instruments. Like the rest of the work, the movement
features repetition at the section, theme, and phrase levels as well as
pervasive modal mixture. Treatment of large-scale tonality garners
particular significance in light of the first movement. Local mixture,
sonorities, and motives grow out of the second movement. Together, these
features bring the sonata to a satisfying close.

As shown in [Example 24](#ex-24), this finale is a five-part
rondo with a coda. Section articulations and proportions are more
straightforward in this movement than in the second. The three refrains
are roughly equal in length. Theme a opens each with a pair of
sentences, recalling similar phrase structures in both prior movements.
The episodes are roughly the same duration as each other, both more than
doubling the number of measures of the refrain. Both episodes contain
internal thematic repetition. Episode 1 preserves instrumentation in
these repeats, emphasizing the flute in e and e′ and the piano in g and
g′. Episode 2 features both instruments in turn in the lyrical heart of
the movement, placing the melody in the flute at h and in the piano at
h′.

{% include center_column_img.html src='assets/articles/inman/img/ex_24.png' img_size='60' fig_num='24' fig_caption='Form, Ewazen, Sonata No. 1 for Flute and Piano/III.'%}


All refrains and episodes feature internal shifts in tonality. The
practice of mixing two adjacent modes on the same tonic within a single
phrase, which surfaces occasionally in the first movement and more often
in the second, increases in the third movement. As Example 24 notes,
most passages feature Aeolian mixed with Dorian or Phrygian or, less
frequently, Ionian mixed with Mixolydian or Lydian. Double-headed arrows
represent this mixture in the tonal trajectories shown in [Examples
25---27](#ex-25). Comparing the three sections reveals a slight
brightening over the course of the movement. Example 25 shows how the
first refrain and episode have the greatest variety of collections,
ranging from four flats to three sharps. Theme d in episode 1 is the
only portion of the piece to touch on Phrygian. The second large section
shown in Example 26, the second refrain and episode, keeps A Ionian and
its neighbor D Ionian as the scales with the most sharps. This portion
only reaches three flats and features more tonalities in sharps. The
third refrain with coda further narrows the range of collections to two
flats through three sharps, as shown in Example 27. Interestingly, D
Lydian substitutes for A Ionian as the three-sharp representative in the
coda, combining the opening tonic pitch with the brighter collection.

{% include full_width_three_img.html 
src1='assets/articles/inman/img/ex_25.png' fig_num1='25' fig_caption1='Tonal trajectories in refrain 1 and episode 1, Ewazen, Sonata No. 1 for Flute and Piano/III.'
src2='assets/articles/inman/img/ex_26.png' fig_num2='26' fig_caption2='Tonal trajectories in refrain 2 and episode 2, Ewazen, Sonata No. 1 for Flute and Piano/III.'
src3='assets/articles/inman/img/ex_27.png' fig_num3='27' fig_caption3='Tonal trajectories in refrain 3 and coda, Ewazen, Sonata No. 1 for Flute and Piano/III.'
%}


The treatment of refrain material in the third movement bears some
similarities to the treatment of the main theme in the first movement.
The first and third refrains are essentially identical, with the latter
ending with a one-bar extension. As shown in Example 24, both pair D
Dorian/Aeolian (minor modes) with F Ionian/Mixolydian (major modes). The
beginning of refrain 2, like the main theme at the start of the
development in the first movement, is transposed down in relation to
refrain 1, this time by a whole step. Instead of ascending a minor third
as in refrain 1, refrain 2 descends a minor third to A Ionian, the
tonality also used at the end of episode 1 and the beginning of episode
2. Like the first movement, the finale announces the coda with a
striking change in mode. [Example 28](#ex-28) compares the
opening of refrain 1 in D Dorian/Aeolian to the coda in D Ionian/Lydian.
Moving the flute into its upper octave further accentuates this
brightening of mode, driving towards the end of the movement. In
general, this move connects to the well-known tradition of
minor-to-major narratives in sonatas.{%- include footnote.html footnote_number='28' footnote_text=page.footnote_28 -%}In particular, though, this
choice garners significance from its context. The finale is the only of
the three movements in this sonata to start and end with the same tonic
pitch. Furthermore, by retaining the opening tonic pitch while
transforming the mode in the coda, the finale reverses the closing
strategy of the first movement. These aspects emphasize completion of
this movement as well as the work as a whole.

{% include center_column_img.html src='assets/articles/inman/img/ex_28a.png' img_size='80' fig_num='28a' fig_caption='Modal transformation, Ewazen, Sonata No. 1 for Flute and Piano/III: Refrain 1, theme a'%}
{% include center_column_img.html src='assets/articles/inman/img/ex_28b.png' img_size='80' fig_num='28b' fig_caption='Modal transformation, Ewazen, Sonata No. 1 for Flute and Piano/III: Coda'%}

Sonorities and motives connect the second and third movements. As is
common in Ewazen's style, figurations in the second movement
occasionally involve a triad with an added second. Examples include m.
12 (Example 17), mm. 87--90 (Example 23), as well as all statements of
theme b [Example 19](#ex-9) and the end of the coda. The third movement leans
more heavily on such sonorities, including the block chords of theme a
shown in Example 28. The voicing and emphasis on parallel motion suggest
that the dissonance is derived as an added second rather than a ninth
topping a tertian chord. Added seconds also season the harmony of
episode 2 in the third movement. Most of those resolve up by step to the
third of the triad, as illustrated by the first two measures of
[Example 29](#ex-29). The remainder of Example 29 shows the
retransition preparing for the third statement of the refrain. Built as
a sentence, this passage references the three-note motive from the
second movement through contour. Brackets mark how the subtle statements
in the middle of the piano's arpeggios are answered by more overt
statements in the flute in longer note values. The middle two statements
in the flute use the same three pitches as the piano, strengthening the
connection between the lines in this passage and solidifying the
reference to the second movement.

{% include center_column_img.html src='assets/articles/inman/img/ex_29.png' img_size='60' fig_num='29' fig_caption='Retransition, Ewazen, Sonata No. 1 for Flute and Piano/III.'%}


Working within the traditional rondo framework, the finale interweaves
multiple threads from the previous two movements. General
characteristics include melodicism, clarity of form at the phrase,
theme, and sectional levels, and the care to showcase both instruments.
More specific elements include the fluid motion between tonalities
within and between phrases and the manner of modal mixture. Tonal
transformations in the coda comment on the closing strategy of the first
movement, and added-note sonorities and the motivic design of the
retransition reference the second movement. The third movement thus
continues and concludes strategies introduced in the two prior
movements, synthesizing multiple dimensions into a strong conclusion to
the work.

</section>

<section markdown="1">

<h2>Conclusion</h2>

Sonata No. 1 for Flute and Piano presents multiple facets of Ewazen's
general compositional approach, documenting the style of one significant
living composer popular with both performers and audiences.{%- include footnote.html footnote_number='29' footnote_text=page.footnote_29 -%}As with
many of his non-programmatic works, this sonata employs aspects of
traditional design that impact motivic development, phrase structure,
and large-scale form. Other aspects of the musical language draw from a
multitude of twentieth-century influences. [Example 30](#ex-30)
lists the styles from Part I that likely influenced specific features of
this work explored in Part II. As Philip Brown (2009, 137) observes,
"Ewazen's music is remarkably accessible for both the performer and the
listener, and his compositions challenge the notion that music has to be
obtuse in order to be profound."

{% include center_column_img.html src='assets/articles/inman/img/ex_30.png' img_size='60' fig_num='30' fig_caption='Summary of influences on Ewazen, Sonata No. 1 for Flute and Piano.'%}


This analysis of Ewazen's Sonata No. 1 for Flute and Piano documents
synthesis of diverse elements into an artistically effective whole.
While all three movements invoke traditional formal types, each embraces
a fluid approach to tonality at the small and large scales. The first
and third movements resolve the main conflict through modal
transformation in the coda. The second embraces the simple idea of two
perfect fifths as the generator of motive, progression, and key
structure in a modal framework. The second and the third share
sonorities and motives. These interrelations create an artistically
unified and satisfying whole that is effective in performance.

The attraction of contemporary tonal music partially stems from the
expressive interweaving of multiple nineteenth- and twentieth-century
influences, as Ewazen's style in general and this sonata in particular
illustrate. Unpacking the characteristics of such music as well as their
chain of influence deserves greater attention in the field of music
theory. Artistry often entails creative recombination of inherited
elements, and much remains to be explored in the form and tonality of
art music of today. 

</section>

<hr>
<hr>
<section id="works-cited" markdown="1" >

<h2>Works Cited</h2>

Altman, Timothy Meyer. 2005. "An Analysis for Performance of Two Chamber
Works with Trumpet by Eric Ewazen: *. . . to cast a shadow again (a song
cycle for voice, trumpet and piano)* and *Trio for Trumpet, Violin and
Piano*." DMA diss., University of Kentucky.

Arnone, Francesca. 2016. "A Sampling of Compelling Flute-Centered
Composers." *The Flutist Quarterly* 41 (3): 30--36.

Atkinson, Sean E. 2019. "Soaring Through the Sky: Topics and Tropes in
Video Game Music." *Music Theory Online* 25 (2).
https://mtosmt.org/issues/mto.19.25.2/mto.19.25.2.atkinson.html.

Aziz, Andrew. 2020. "Temporal Disruptions in Debussy's and Ravel's
Programmatic Sonata." *Music Analysis* 39 (3): 314--58.

Bates, Ian. 2012. "Vaughan Williams's Five Variants of 'Dives and
Lazarus': A Study of the Composer's Approach to Diatonic Organization."
*Music Theory Spectrum* 34 (1): 34--50.

Biamonte, Nicole. 2010. "Triadic Modal and Pentatonic Patterns in Rock
Music." *Music Theory Spectrum* 32 (2): 95­--110.

Brown, Philip. 2009. "Eric Ewazen." In *A Composer's Insight: Thoughts,
Analysis, and Commentary on Contemporary Masterpieces for Wind Band*,
Vol. 4, edited by Timothy Salzman, 137--60. Galesville, MD: Meredith
Music Publications.

Caplin, William E. 1998. *Classical Form: A Theory of Formal Functions
for the Instrumental Music of Haydn, Mozart, and Beethoven*. New York:
Oxford University Press.

---------. 2009. "What are Formal Functions?" In *Musical Form, Forms,
and Formenlehre: Three Methodological Reflections*, edited by Pieter
Bergé, 21--40. Leuven: Leuven University Press.

Clement, Brett. 2013. "Modal Tonicization in Rock: The Special Case of
the Lydian Scale." *Gamut: Online Journal of the Music Theory Society of
the Mid-Atlantic* 6 (1): 95­--141.
<https://trace.tennessee.edu/gamut/vol6/iss1/4>.

Clement, Brett. 2019. "Diatonic and Chromatic Tonicization in Rock
Music." *Journal of Music Theory* 63 (1): 1--33.

Cone, Edward T. 1968. *Musical Form and Musical Performance*. New York:
W. W. Norton.

Duffie, Bruce. 1998. "Composer Eric Ewazen: A Conversation with Bruce
Duffie." <https://www.bruceduffie.com/ewazen2.html>.

Everett, Walter. 2004. "Making Sense of Rock's Tonal Systems." *Music
Theory Online* 10 (4).
<https://www.mtosmt.org/issues/mto.04.10.4/mto.04.10.4.w_everett.html>.

Ewazen, Eric. 1997. *Sonata for Trumpet and Piano*. Southern Music
Company.

---------. 1998. *Sonata for Horn and Piano*. Southern Music Company.

---------. 2011. *Sonata No. 1 for Flute and Piano*. Theodore Presser
Company.

---------. 2013. *Sonata No. 2 for Flute and Piano*. Theodore Presser
Company.

---------. 2016. *Sonata for Euphonium and Piano*. Theodore Presser
Company.

---------. n.d. "Music." The Music of Eric Ewazen.
<https://www.ericewazen.com/themusic.php>.

Feldman, Evan. 2015. "Ewazen, Eric." *Grove Music Online.*
<https://doi.org/10.1093/gmo/9781561592630.article.A2284315>.

Harrison, Daniel. 2016. *Pieces of Tradition: An Analysis of
Contemporary Tonal Music*. New York: Oxford University Press.

Heinzelmann, Sigrun B. 2011. "Playing with Models: Sonata Form in
Ravel's String Quartet and Piano Trio." In *Unmasking Ravel: New
Perspectives on the Music*, edited by Peter Kaminsky, 143--79.
Rochester, NY: University of Rochester Press.

Hepokoski, James. 2002. "Beyond the Sonata Principle." *Journal of the
American Musicological Society* 55: 91--154.

Hepokoski, James and Warren Darcy. 2006. *Elements of Sonata Theory:
Norms, Types, and Deformations in the Late-Eighteenth-Century Sonata*.
New York: Oxford University Press.

HipBoneMusic. 2017. "Bone2Pick: Eric Ewazen Interview."
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=I6xGmv8SZy0>.

Hook, Julian. 2008. "Signature Transformations." In *Music Theory and
Mathematics: Chords, Collections, and Transformations*, edited by Jack
Douthett, Martha M. Hyde, and Charles J. Smith, 137--160. Rochester, NY:
University of Rochester Press.

Hyer, Brian. 2001. "Tonality." *Grove Music Online.*
<https://doi.org/10.1093/gmo/9781561592630.article.28102>.

Kaminsky, Peter. 2011. "Ravel's Approach to Formal Process: Comparisons
and Contexts." In *Unmasking Ravel: New Perspectives on the Music*,
edited by Peter Kaminsky, 85--110. Rochester, NY: University of
Rochester Press.

Lam, Nathan L. 2019. "Relative Diatonic Modality in Extended
Common-Practice Music." PhD diss., Indiana University.

Lehman, Frank. 2018. *Hollywood Harmony: Musical Wonder and the Sound of
the Cinema*. New York: Oxford University Press.

Madden, John T. 2002. "An Interview with Eric Ewazen." *Journal of the
World Association for Symphonic Bands and Ensembles* 9: 135--41.

McNally III, Joseph Daniel. 2008. "A Performer's Analysis of Eric
Ewazen's Sonata for Trumpet and Piano." DMA diss., University of
Southern Mississippi.

Osborn, Brad. 2017. "Rock Harmony Reconsidered: Tonal, Modal, and
Contrapuntal Voice-Leading Systems in Radiohead." *Music Analysis* 36
(1): 59--93.

Page, Tim. 1986. "Music: Works by Ewazen." *New York Times*.
<https://www.nytimes.com/1986/10/02/arts/music-works-by-ewazen.html>.

Pettit, Heather. 2003. "With Band Music Eric Ewazen is Like a Child in a
Candy Store." *Instrumentalist* 57 (9): 32--39.

Schmidt-Best, Thomas. 2011. *The Sonata*. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.

Schneller, Tom. 2013. "Modal Interchange and Semantic Resonance in
Themes by John Williams." *Journal of Film Music* 6 (1): 49--74.

Snedecker, Jeffrey. 2001. "The Color of Brass: An Interview with Eric
Ewazen." *The Horn Call: Journal of the International Horn Society* 32
(1): 33--34.

Straus, Joseph N. 2016. *Introduction to Post-Tonal Theory*. 4th
edition. New York: W. W. Norton.

Temperley, David. 2018. *The Musical Language of Rock*. New York: Oxford
University Press.

Webster, James. 1978. "Schubert's Sonata Form and Brahms's First
Maturity." *19th-Century Music* 2 (1): 18--35.

</section>
