---
layout: article
volume: Volume 38, June 2024
title: "Imagining an Autochthonous Music: The First Movement of W.G. Still's
Fourth Symphony"
author: "David Hier"
abstract: "William Grant Still occupied a singularly exalted place in American
music during the 1930s and 1940s. His music was recognized as being
emblematic of American music and life both in the United States and
abroad. He himself argued that his music combined a variety of
influences to produce a style that reflected the diversity of American
life. Still's Fourth Symphony, subtitled &quotAutochthonous&quot encapsulates
his mature style and its subtitle suggests a musical language deeply
rooted in American idioms. The assuredness and craftsmanship of the
symphony, however, belie Still's earlier struggles to find his voice and
to reconcile competing perspectives about the relationship of Black
artists to European and modernist art forms. Still's Fourth Symphony
offers his solution to these problems by triangulating the European
common-practice, international modernist, and African and
African-American musical styles. The first movement incorporates the
three influences deeply into its compositional fabric and I employ a
variety of analytical techniques to illustrate its stylistic pluralism.
I argue that the movement articulates a view of American autochthony
that is paradoxically pluralist and conclude by assessing the success of
Still's symphony from this perspective."
---

{% capture footnote_1%} For much more on the socio-political and musical motivations for Still's move to Los Angeles, see DjeDje 2000. Still was likely motivated to move there because of growing disillusionment with musical life in New York and because of the high concentration of diverse and talented musicians working in Hollywood. At the time, however, it was still a risky adventure, and so the echoes of Greeley's famous advice, "Go west, young man," despite Still's more advanced age, are impossible to ignore. {% endcapture %}
{% capture footnote_2%} The word "autochthonous" comes to us from Ancient Greece where it applied to the indigenous inhabitants of a territory as opposed to colonists or settlers and their descendants---autochthonous individuals are products of the soil itself. Still's use of the term suggests a metaphorical autochthony as opposed to a literal one, since, while he alludes to the truly autochthonous music of American aboriginals, his artistic vision combines it with the music of the descendants of colonists, immigrants, and slaves. While "autochthony" also had darker, proto-nationalistic connotations, it is clear that Still intends for the word to connote inclusivity and pluralism. For more on the term and its Athenian roots, see Blok 2009. {% endcapture %}
{% capture footnote_3%} Haas describes the movement as being formally "free" while alluding to sonata-allegro form (1987, 43) and somewhat mystifyingly claims that the piece proceeds from D major to C major to D major. I believe the piece adheres rather closely to sonata form. Still himself wrote that while sketching a new piece "my usual practice is to map out a plan which conforms loosely to the established rules of musical form, and then deviate from it as I see fit." (1987a, 109). His statement implies that he uses sonata form as a generic backdrop for his music despite superficial deviations from established norms. {% endcapture %}
{% capture footnote_4%} For more on organicism in music and its relationship to philosophy and the arts, see Solie 1980 and Neubauer 2009. While organicism is frequently described in Western philosophical terms---where it begins with Aristotle, passes through German romanticism to Spengler, and continues to influence contemporary thought---what Thorsten Botz-Bornstein describes as "micro-macro" thought is common also to non-Western culture. Botz-Bornstein interprets organicist thought in Chinese, Japanese, Russian, Arab, and Bantu cultures: the Bantu concept of *ugumwe*---roughly, "oneness"---denotes a political, collective solidarity between members of families, clans, and tribes (127). {% endcapture %}
{% capture footnote_5%} My approach to thematic transformation is indebted to Rudolph Reti's (1951) method in which the motives comprising a larger theme may be freely rearranged ("interverted") and varied. Reti contends that thematic transformations and relationships of this sort are central to the aesthetics of post-Beethovenian organic form, in which small motives mutate and grow across a work---a thematic conception eerily similar to Still's own above. Solie (1980) argues that Reti's method exemplifies organicist conceptualization and analysis of music. More recent motivic theories similarly consider permutation and more distant motivic relationships; see for example Auerbach 2021. {% endcapture %}
{% capture footnote_6%} The pentatonic collection can also be found in other American music from the first half of the twentieth century, for example in the music of Aaron Copland, see Heertderks (2011). The music likely borrows from or alludes to African contributions to American music. {% endcapture %}
{% capture footnote_7%} See for instance Kubik's discussion of the Gogo tone system which includes at least seven pitches corresponding closely to the harmonic series (1994, 179) as well as hexatonic and heptatonic scales found in Cameroon, Angola, and Zambia (1994, 174). {% endcapture %}
{% capture footnote_8%} David Temperley has noted that syncopations, especially anticipatory ones, are commonly found in late 19<sup>th</sup>-century ragtime music and in recordings made contemporaneously by African-American singers (2021). Kubik (1994) similarly traces syncopation practices in a wide variety of sub-Saharan African cultures. {% endcapture %}
{% capture footnote_9%} Numerous sources describe both variation techniques in jazz, West African, and sub-Saharan music, see William Austin (1966), Gunther Schuller (1968), Gerhard Kubik (1994), and especially Simha Arom (1993), who argues that sub-Saharan music is frequently characterized by a "cyclic structure that generates numerous improvised variations: repetition and variation is one of the most fundamental principles of all Central African musics, as indeed of many other musics in Black Africa" (134). Clearly, the "unity-in-diversity" principle of organicism does not belong solely to Europe. {% endcapture %}
{% capture footnote_10%} Simultaneous appoggiaturas may be found, for example, in Mozart's G-minor Symphony and elsewhere, as shown by Schoenberg in his *Harmonielehre* (1911, 368). {% endcapture %}
{% capture footnote_11%} Discussing the role of politics in art, Still writes "In my humble opinion, politics as such should not enter into the consciousness of a true artist when his work is concerned. He should, however, be interested in the human problems that are a part of our lives, and should balance this with his interest in the abstract elements of his art form. It was the human need that impelled me to write such a composition as 'In Memoriam: The Colored Soldiers Who Died for Democracy,' rather than any political consideration, for whatever my political views or however I vote in the little curtained booth, these things have nothing whatever to do with the music I write" (Spencer 1992, 149). It could of course be argued, however, that Still's music reflects the political context of his time, whether consciously or not. {% endcapture %}
{% capture footnote_12%} For more on these transformations, see Cohn 2012. While Riemannian and neo-Riemannian analysis rarely coexist, I have opted to include both here in order to illustrate how Still's piece engages with different aesthetics simultaneously: the first subject is tonal-functional but includes the extended harmonies captured well by Riemannian functional theory, while the second subject draws on a sequential logic better described by transformational (or neo-Riemannian) analysis. For more on the distinction between the two approaches, see Rings 2011. In my analysis, the local transformations serve to expand the subdominant function, since in D major/minor, E<span style="font-family: music;">&#x266D;</span>, G, and B function as *<sup>o</sup>Sp*, *S<sup>+</sup>*, and *S<sup>+</sup> of* , respectively. {% endcapture %}
{% capture footnote_13%} The bass's large-scale motion depicted in Example 6 is supported by formal articulations: the first eight measures sustain E<span style="font-family: music;">&#x266D;</span>, the next two repetitions of the compound basic idea sustain E as an upper neighbor, and the continuation phrase reintroduces E<span style="font-family: music;">&#x266D;</span> in m. 47, initiating an increase in harmonic rhythm: G in mm. 49--52, B<span style="font-family: music;">&#x266D;</span> in 53--57, and the goal D in 58. Since m. 49 brings back the initial (0148) sonority, I hear the E<span style="font-family: music;">&#x266D;</span>--G motion as one unit. The B<span style="font-family: music;">&#x266D;</span>--D motion in the bass in mm. 53--58 has a transformational/motivic function, in that it repeats the earlier bass motion E<span style="font-family: music;">&#x266D;</span>--G, but it also forms part of a functional tonal cadence that ends the second subject, VI--ii--V--I in D minor. {% endcapture %}
{% capture footnote_14%} Blues scales typically feature scale-degree <span style="font-family: music;">&#x266F;</span>4/<span style="font-family: music;">&#x266D;</span>5 in addition to a minor third above the tonic. For more on blues scales see Chodos 2018, which summarizes different theoretical approaches to the blues scale and questions its validity as a theoretical construct. Most theories of the scale include <span style="font-family: music;">&#x266D;&#xEF02;</span>, <span style="font-family: music;">&#x266E;&#xEF02;</span>, <span style="font-family: music;">&#x266F;&#xEF03;</span>, <span style="font-family: music;">&#&#xEF06;</span>, and <span style="font-family: music;">&#x266E;&#xEF06;</span> without <span style="font-family: music;">&#xEF05;</span>. In the passage cited, Still combines the sound of the blue scale with passages that correspond more closely to the minor mode, for example the inclusion of <span style="font-family: music;">&#x266D;&#xEF05;</span> and short melodic-minor scale-fragments, A--B--C<span style="font-family: music;">&#x266F;</span>--D. {% endcapture %}
{% capture footnote_15%} Paul Oliver (1991) also charts the history of the blues and of pioneering musicological studies of it by Rudi Blesh, Gunther Schuller and others. One common thread among the many different theories provided for the origin of blues is its combination of African and European elements, though historians disagree about its relationship to jazz, when and where it originated, etc. {% endcapture %}
{% capture footnote_16%} See, for instance, the rhythmic-set structure of sub-Saharan drumming in Anku (2000) and Kubik (1994). Layered *ostinati* are common to many different African cultures. {% endcapture %}
{% capture footnote_17%} Similar crises may be found in passages from major nineteenth-century symphonies. Famous examples include dissonant minor-mode passages in the third movement of Bruckner's Ninth Symphony, the first movement of Mahler's Tenth Symphony, the finales of Beethoven's Eighth and Ninth Symphonies among others. The "negative climax" in Still's Fourth is perhaps less dramatic and extreme than some of these examples, but the effect is similar. {% endcapture %}


<section markdown="1" >
Few composers can lay a stronger claim to be among the fathers of
American art music than William Grant Still. His music's enormous
popularity in the 1930s and 1940s, in combination with its consummate
craftsmanship, cemented his lasting reputation as not only the "Dean of
Afro-American Composers" but as one of America's greatest musical minds.
It is unfortunate that his music has not received more thorough
analysis, but perhaps one reason for this, among others, is the music's
optimistic pluralism, which confounds facile musical (and extra-musical)
analysis. In Still's music reside three desires: to follow in the
tradition of European art music; to produce a distinctly
African-American art music; and to engage, however ambivalently, with
the growing international modernist movement. His 1947 Fourth
Symphony---titled "Autochthonous" by Still---grapples meaningfully with
these three impulses, revealing hidden affinities while attempting to
produce what Still called a "universal" style. In order to demonstrate
how Still's mature style combines the three key influences---European
art music tradition, African-American tradition, and modernism---I will
examine the first movement of the Fourth Symphony. Still's music and
writings demonstrate a devotion to European art music and the Black
experience. To illustrate this, I provide a musical and social context
for Still's late style and stylistic evolution, and I propose musical
features that represent the three influences and document their roles in
the first movement of the Fourth Symphony. By considering the movement
and its narrative as a whole, I will conclude by reflecting on the
music's combination of diverse influences, its supposed universality,
and its relationship to the music of Still's contemporaries.
</section>

<section markdown="1" >
<h2>1. Still's Music: Musical and Social Contexts</h2>

Still's music has often been cited as being conspicuously "American."
Verna Arvey, Still's wife and collaborator, considered his music to
exemplify American pluralism:

> More than a quarter of a century ago, North Americans were busily
> engaged in a search for a serious composer whose works would most
> accurately reflect their country in music . . . It seemed to some
> searchers that perhaps a blend of *all* types of music would best
> represent the melting pot that is the U.S.A. . . . Small wonder that
> when audiences abroad hear \[Still's\] music, they are apt to
> recognize it immediately as being a product of the North American
> continent. Some European critics have described it as the most
> "indigenous" music to come out of North America. (1972, 82)

Robert Bartlett Haas, the well-known educator and specialist in American
modernist literature, similarly sees Still's music as an influential
contribution that synthesizes Black and White musical cultures: "The
militants claim he is writing 'Eur-American,' not 'Afro-American' music,
but this is not an historically accurate statement. Hale Smith, Ulysses
Kay, Arthur Cunningham, Olly Wilson, and others, Black composers,
*avant-garde* to a greater or lesser degree, all recognize Still as a
pioneer" (1972, 2). Still's music has been widely recognized as sounding
specifically American while also laying the foundation for generations
of more experimental Black composers who followed.

More recently, scholars have sought to contextualize Still's pioneering
musical efforts within the world of American music in the first half of
the twentieth century. Gayle Murchison groups Still's output---following
his own analysis---into three periods: an early "ultramodern" period, a
period dominated by a "racial idiom," and a period dominated by a
"universal idiom," which is a synthesis of the two previous styles
combined with European common-practice elements Still developed while
studying at Oberlin (2000, 48). Catherine Parsons Smith similarly sees
Still's career as an expression of a characteristically American
pluralism: "\[Still's\] identification as an African American who
confounded a range of sometimes conflicting popular stereotypes---raised
in an urban Southern environment in a tight-knit family with aspirations
to uplift the race; active and successful in the separate, culturally
opposed worlds of commercial and concert music; more the modernist and
Harlem Renaissance man than he would have cared to admit, self-exile
notwithstanding---assured that his aesthetic synthesis would be a unique
and valuable contribution to American culture." (2000, 204). Still's
professional background and aesthetics owe much to balancing different
musical, financial, and political demands, and the success with which he
did so early in his career informed the development of his musical
style.

Still's compositional style evolved gradually until he settled into a
more universalist mature style. After initial forays into music, Still
studied at the Oberlin Conservatory of Music, where he absorbed
common-practice European compositional practice. It was his move to New
York in 1919, however, that would unveil new musical horizons. Working
at first primarily as a jazz arranger, Still gained access to larger
orchestras and experimented with novel arrangements. The popularity of
the shows to which he contributed--- including *Rain or Shine*, *Dixie
to Broadway*, and *The Earl Carroll Vanities*---provided him with
recognition and what he may have considered to be lucre, since he
remained determined to escape the world of commercial music. According
to Griffith Edwards: "Still was too conscious of the vernacular music
<u>not</u> being recognized to see early jazz as Afro-America's
ultimate identity in music. Jazz 'is not our most important
contribution,' he maintained. 'It simply happens to be the one fortunate
enough to have secured the most extensive financial backing'" (1987, 70,
emphasis in the original). His early exposure and mastery of popular
music forms, however, were certainly formative.

It was Still's two-year apprenticeship with Edgar Varèse beginning in
1923 that would fundamentally alter his compositional destiny. Though
Still was deeply critical of the musical avant-garde later in life,
Varèse opened compositional and professional doors previously closed to
him. Through Varèse, Still met Leopold Stokowski, Howard Hanson, Arnold
Schoenberg, Ottorino Respighi and others (Edwards 1987, 75). Still
composed several pieces under the influence of Varèse's modernist
aesthetics, but according to Edwards, Varèse's ultimate influence was
"to help him find for himself the artistic abilities and the personal
mission with which he could balance and shape the lessons of his youth."
(1987, 78). Nevertheless, Still's early brush with musical modernism
cannot be easily dismissed: as we shall see, modernist techniques exist
alongside others in Still's mature work. Smith argues that Still's
eventual break with Varèse, and by extension the major modernist figures
of the day, was motivated by his desire to create "a 'serious' African
American Style \[that\] could not, by its nature, use much of the
ultramodern dissonance to which Varèse had introduced him and at the
same time reach the audience with which he sought to communicate . . .
Still was clearly influenced . . . by the New Negro movement, even
though his association with it was often more a matter of geographic and
social proximity than direct, self-conscious intellectual
participation." (2000, 71-72)

Alongside his study of modernist techniques developed primarily by white
composers in New York, Still encountered the nascent, burgeoning Harlem
Renaissance. The publication of Alain Locke's *The New Negro* in 1925
spurred a determination in Black America and throughout the African
diaspora to create a new, authentic artistic culture that assimilated
the totality of Black experience, from nineteenth-century
African-American nationalism to slavery and liberation, along with the
exodus out of the agrarian South to the boisterous urban North (1997
\[1925\], 256). But Locke's seminal work capped what had already been
decades of internal debate amongst scholars, artists, and political
leaders. Belying the concerted front that desired political reform and
new artistic expression, those with competing visions for what
African-American art should look like engaged in heady debate. Informing
one perspective was W.E.B. Du Bois's vision for Black education, which
would unlock new artistic vistas and social opportunity by combining
training in common-practice European techniques with Black experience:

> Above our modern socialism, and out of worship of the mass, must
> persist and evolve that higher individualism which the centres of
> culture protect; there must come a loftier respect for the sovereign
> human soul that seeks to know itself and the world about it; that
> seeks a freedom for expansion and self-development; that will love and
> labor in its own way, untrammeled alike by old and new . . . Herein
> the longing of black men must have respect: the rich and bitter depth
> of their experience, the unknown treasures of their inner life, the
> strange rendings of nature they have seen, may give the world new
> points of view . . . I sit with Shakespeare and he winces not. Across
> the color line I move arm in arm with Balzac and Dumas, where smiling
> men and welcoming women glide in gilded halls . . . So, wed with
> Truth, I dwell above the Veil. Is this the life you grudge us, O
> knightly America? (2018 \[1903\], 85--86)

Du Bois's perspective blends the need to educate Black youths using the
same classical materials and techniques, though not exclusively, that
served their white peers and that they were outrageously denied.

In contrast, Langston Hughes later famously approached the problem of
Black cultural identity by arguing that Black artists need be proud of
their own history, experience, and institutions:

> I am ashamed for the black poet who says, "I want to be a poet, not a
> Negro poet," as though his own racial world were not as interesting as
> any other world. I am ashamed, too, for the colored artist who runs
> from the painting of Negro faces to the painting of sunsets after the
> manner of the academicians because he fears the strange unwhiteness of
> his own features. An artist must be free to choose what he does,
> certainly, but he must also never be afraid to do what he must choose.
> (1999 \[1926\], 56)

Caught in the middle, Still had experimented with these two sides of the
multifaceted debate, having been a student at Oberlin---the *ne plus
ultra* of a musical academy---and an active and highly successful jazz
musician, and having left Arkansas for New York and Boston. According to
Murchison, Still exemplified the Harlem Renaissance's search for the new
man:

> Music was central to Locke's beliefs about the cultural strivings of
> the New Negro. Locke concurred with Du Bois that the spirituals were
> truly American, the gift of the Negro to American music, and were
> expressive of African American life, culture, history, and condition .
> . . Although Locke acknowledged that the masses were on the vanguard
> of change in African American life (e.g., migrations, vernacular music
> such as folk traditions, jazz and blues, and other vernacular
> culture), it was not folk music or popular music that would be
> redemptive in his vision of artistic culture. Rather, it was genius .
> . . who should use the spirituals and other black vernacular musical
> idioms as a resource to create the foundation for an African American
> art music. Locke cast Still in this role. (2000, 47)

Still produced overtly "racial" pieces in the late 1920s and early '30s,
but he ultimately became dissatisfied with the limitations of producing
such music. Carol Oja characterizes the conflict facing Still as one
common to many Black artists in the 1920s:

> For Black artists this strong interest in Negro culture resulted in a
> tension between devising work that was identifiably African-American
> and following their own artistic vision. Sometimes the two coexisted
> comfortably, sometimes they did not . . . The conflict between a more
> dissonant---or "ultramodern"---musical style and an identifiably black
> one became central to Still's music in the years ahead. If his works
> leaned too far in the first direction, he faced the same kinds of
> criticisms hurled at all the young American modernists . . . if Still
> incorporated all aspects of a given African-American idiom---melodic,
> formal, and especially harmonic---he risked having his music viewed as
> "simple" or "filled with naïveté" . . . Fusing the modernist with the
> racial, his pieces continued to be promoted by new music
> organizations. (1992, 154--55)

Still's solution to the problem was to attempt to define a more
universal musical language that combined common-practice, modernist, and
non-Western (in his case, specifically Black) elements to produce a
musical whole readily understood by the public. And his refusal to
choose between a common-practice informed style and explicitly racial
music is perhaps also echoed in his move to and final settlement in Los
Angeles in the 1930s---a westward peregrination that itself mythically
characterizes American individualism and enterprise.{% include footnote.html footnote_number='1' footnote_text=footnote_1%}

Still's vision for Black musical education combines Du Bois's esteem for
Euro-American art music tradition with Hughes's desire for sincere study
of Black contributions to American music, as he wrote:

> In the first place, I would suggest that students who want to learn
> about Negro music should undertake it in all sincerity, not with the
> idea that they are taking a snap course, or that they will be
> permitted to sit and listen to jazz recordings during every class
> period. This may be enjoyable, but it is not genuine study. The latter
> in my opinion should be historical, analytical, comparative, and
> should be undertaken above all with an open mind . . . Along with
> this, the Negro student of music should learn Bach, "that old, dead
> punk," and all the other composers who have made valuable
> contributions to music. (Spencer 1992, 223)

His reflections on being a composer similarly call for the need for
Black composers to achieve individuality:

> I had chosen a definite goal, namely, to elevate Negro musical idioms
> to a position of dignity and effectiveness in the fields of symphonic
> and operatic music . . . American music is a composite of all the
> idioms of all the people comprising this nation, just as most
> Afro-Americans who are 'officially' classed as Negroes are products of
> the mingling of several bloods. This makes us *individuals*, and that
> is how we should function, musically and otherwise. (Spencer, 1992,
> 225--6, emphasis in the original)

It is abundantly clear that Still and his many interpreters see his
music as embodying American music's pluralism and its ability to foster
novelty by synthesizing received traditions. Still's own words attest to
his vision for his music's place in American culture. He waxes prophetic
while imagining the future of American music: "We have in the United
States a great many idioms, some aboriginal, some springing from the
people who came here from other lands. Someday probably the separate
idioms in America may merge, or a composer will come along who will make
an overall use of them and we will then have a distinctly native idiom,
recognizable as such" (Spencer 1992, 120). For Still, the ideal of
producing a distinctly "native" idiom lies in the future, and his role
was to act as a contributor to its creation. The Fourth Symphony is a
particularly exemplary work of Still's universalist style. Its subtitle,
"autochthonous," immediately establishes the work's aim: to produce a
music that emerges from and could only emerge from American soil.{% include footnote.html footnote_number='2' footnote_text=footnote_2%}
Still was surely not oblivious to the apparent paradoxes: the conflict
between a "native" music and a "universalist" idiom, and between an
already-extant "aboriginal" idiom and a "distinctly native idiom" that
has yet to be born. As we examine the piece in greater detail below, we
will see how Still reconciles the two, often by implying or arguing that
an autochthonous American music is by nature universal since it
interweaves seemingly disparate cultural threads into a complete
tapestry.
</section>

<section markdown="1" >
<h2>2. European Art-Music Tradition, Modernism, and African(-American)
Elements</h2>

Still's success at creating a uniquely pluralist American art music
derives from his triangulation of three stylistic elements: European
art-music tradition, modernism, and African-American elements. All three
elements are present in the Fourth Symphony. I will briefly describe and
define these three elements before pursuing them analytically in greater
detail in the next section.

Several features bind Still's work to the European art-music tradition:
its form, genre, motivic construction, and use of common-practice
tonality. Still titles the work a "symphony," and the work contains the
traditional four movements: sonata-allegro, adagio, dance movement, and
finale. The first movement, which forms the focus of my analysis,
adheres closely to sonata form: the work is thoroughly tonal and can be
analyzed from a tonal-functional point of view with relative ease.

{% include center_column_img.html src='assets/articles/hier/img/ex_1.png' img_size='100' fig_num='1' fig_caption='Formal overview of the first movement of Still\'s Fourth Symphony' %}


[Example 1](#ex-1) provides a reading of the piece's form. The
movement's first subject is a classical period in D major; its
repetition functions as a transition to the second subject; the second
subject contrasts tonally and thematically with the first; the
development section contrasts the exposition's thematic ideas with newer
material while exploring keys related more distantly to the global
tonic; and the recapitulation, while mightily compressed, restates both
subjects in the home key.{% include footnote.html footnote_number='3' footnote_text=footnote_3%} I will return to a closer reading of the
piece's form below.

The piece also engages with familiar organicist traits long identified
with the aesthetics of analysts and composers of Western music,
particularly beginning in the nineteenth century and climaxing in the
early twentieth century.{% include footnote.html footnote_number='4' footnote_text=footnote_4%} Still acknowledges the influence of an
"organicist" approach to manipulating thematic material:

> There must be a recurrence of thematic material in any musical
> composition before any listener, trained or untrained, can detect the
> form, or plan, that underlies the work. This recurrence of theme
> brings a well-defined unity . . . The classic masters believed that
> they had to hammer away at a theme in order to drive it into people's
> consciousness. I agree with them, except I do not believe in exact
> repetitions . . . In composing, I prefer to have shorter themes than
> the masters usually employed, so as not to tax the memory, and to
> repeat these shorter themes often, with alterations." (Spencer 1992,
> 175--176)

Still's need to vary material echoes the symphonic forms of Brahms and
Mahler whose music Ruth A. Solie describes as typical of romantic
organicist thought. Still's variation process also reflects Samuel
Coleridge Taylor's view that "a work of art considered as a living
being, then, will be evaluated, similarly, in terms of
multiplicity-in-unity" (Solie 1980, 148). [Example 2](#ex-2) provides the primary thematic material for the whole movement. Its
opening motto contains three motives---x, y, and z---which are used to
build the first and second subjects.{% include footnote.html footnote_number='5' footnote_text=footnote_5%} The first subject begins with
motive z (without the note E and rhythmically varied), continues with a
rhythmic variation of motive x transposed to D, and ends with a loose
augmentation of motive y. The second subject begins with motive x
transposed to G followed by a variation of motive y, in which the
initial descending interval is changed from a whole tone to a major
third and in which the final note enters an eighth note earlier.

{% include center_column_img.html src='assets/articles/hier/img/ex_2.png' img_size='100' fig_num='2' fig_caption='Still, Symphony No. 4. The first movement\'s thematic material'%}

Still's evocation of African and African-American music manifests in
four critical domains: modality, thematic material, harmonic
parallelism, and rhythm. The motto, first subject, and second subject
are all drawn from the major pentatonic scale. Musicologists and
ethnomusicologists working in the first half of the twentieth century
identified the pentatonic scale as an African contribution to
African-American music.{% include footnote.html footnote_number='6' footnote_text=footnote_6%} More recently, Christopher Jenkins has
traced the use of the pentatonic scale in Coleridge-Taylor Perkinson's
chamber music, where he argues that it evokes African-American musical
practice. Jenkins defines "signifyin(g) broadly as "a mode of indirect
and/or coded communication, intended to convey multiple meanings
specific to various in-groups with access to specialized information . .
. repetition is a key aspect of signifyin(g), often (but not always)
through the repeated presentation of a representation figure alluding to
source material in an original context but overlaid by a shifting
accompaniment. Through the presentation of representational material in
difference contexts, our understanding of its meaning changes" (2019,
392). In Jenkins' analysis of Perkinson's *Lament* for viola and piano,
he observes that a syncopated, pentatonic viola line is set against a
rhythmically regular piano accompaniment which frequently supports the
tune with chromatic, at times dissonant harmonies: "Given the emphasis .
. . on repetition as a central trope within the constellation of
signifyin(g) practices, it seems clear that through his repetition of
the D minor pentatonic scale in a constantly syncopated solo line,
Perkinson is signifyin(g) upon both the pentatonic scale as a building
block in African American music and the concept of syncopation, as the
viola remains rhythmically disjunct from the regular eighth notes of the
piano" (2019, 398). Still's symphony similarly contrasts syncopated
pentatonic material with metrically regular chromatic accompaniments,
and he achieves a similar effect: the pentatonic source material
coexists with the traditional symphonic and modernist elements in the
piece, and their relationship to one another becomes one of the focal
points of the piece.

Still also references harmonic and voice-leading qualities common to
African music and jazz. Gerhard Kubik (1994) describes the widespread
practice of "homophonic multi-part singing" in sub-Saharan Africa, both
in the western and eastern parts of the continent. Scales vary by
location, ranging from the major pentatonic to more extended scales
whose pitches relate closely to the harmonic series.{% include footnote.html footnote_number='7' footnote_text=footnote_7%} In many of
these cultures, singers sing in parallel dyads or trichords such that
two scale degrees separate each voice---the size of the intervallic
spacing of the voices depends on the particular scale used. A pentatonic
scale will produce dyads of a third or fourth when two voices traverse
the scale. Vertical intervals include thirds, fourths, fifths, tritones,
and mixtures of these intervals. Still's music frequently makes use of
parallel harmony, and his employ of different scales---whether diatonic,
blues, or polytonal---produces different vertical intervals.

The symphony's modernist traits are less conspicuous but nonetheless
central to Still's aesthetic. Still may have ultimately rejected
Varèse's tutelage, but his music retains an expanded harmonic palette.
While the first movement of the Fourth Symphony is tonal, it avails
itself of harmonic innovations associated with modernist tonal and
post-tonal repertories. Still alternates, as we shall see, between
passages exhibiting relatively clear tonal functions and those dominated
by polytonality. Other passages contain discordant sonorities whose
tonal meanings hinge on chromatic voice-leading techniques. Still also
adjusts the symphony's form: within the traditional sonata-allegro
exposition, he diminishes the tonal contrast in the exposition in favor
of harmonic, rhythmic, and orchestration contrasts---in other words, the
three stylistic influences themselves become the focus of the sonata
form's dialectics instead of simple themes and motives.

Still's project, which combines European art-music tradition,
African-American, and more contemporary compositional techniques, is
itself modernist in conception. Modernist works, especially in
literature, have long been considered to contain multiple voices,
producing a stylistic polyphony that captures the experience of a wide
range of characters and perspectives. Writing about the modernist novel,
Stephen Kern argues that "modernists also developed a range of voices to
tell the many ways their narrators knew, or did not know, what their
characters were doing and why. Thus, the polyvision and polyphony of
modernist narrators aligned with their multiple ways of knowing . . .
\[modernists\] devised a variety of restricted and multiple ways of
viewing characters and events through singular, serial, parallel, and
embedded focalizations" (2011, 179--180). In Still's symphony, the
voices of European symphonists from Beethoven to Bruckner, the voices of
Black musicians from New York City jazz musicians to traditional West
African musicians upon whose contributions jazz is founded, and the
voices of city and country blend in superimposition, develop serially in
separation, and eventually merge to produce Still's portrait of what he
envisioned to be a distinctly American music throughout the course of
the symphony's first movement.

Finally, the three elements are not entirely discrete---there is
significant overlap between them, and Still's style owes some of its
success and his generally optimistic perspective owes some of its power
to his ability to blur the perhaps too rigid boundaries separating
seemingly different artistic worlds. In Still's music, we hear the
connections between the common-practice tradition and modernism, between
White and Black, and between the high-minded, "cerebral" (to use Still's
word) world of modernist experimentation and commercial and folk music
in several musical domains. Complex, layered polyrhythms allude to
sub-Saharan drumming and late nineteenth-century ragtime music but also
to the hemiolas of Brahms.{% include footnote.html footnote_number='8' footnote_text=footnote_8%} Harmonic planing evokes faux-bourdon as
well as African harmonic parallelism, and Still's use of this technique
further references the European art music tradition, African tradition,
and modernism by employing parallel harmonies in both functional and
polytonal settings. The small set of melodic cells undergoing "genetic"
mutation recalls romantic organicism but also the improvisatory
foundation of jazz and central African music,{% include footnote.html footnote_number='9' footnote_text=footnote_9%} The symphonic form is
the ideal canvas upon which Still can paint his vision for a new music
assembled from the old.
</section>

<section markdown="1" >
<h2>3. The First Movement of the Fourth Symphony as a Whole</h2>

<h3>a) Overview</h3>

The three facets of Still's style discussed above intermingle and
develop in the first movement of the Fourth Symphony. Still's
pluralistic compositional approach necessarily requires a pluralistic
analytical attitude, and so, in the following analysis, I will make use
of many different analytical techniques, tools, and techniques. While
some of these techniques are not often presented simultaneously in
analysis, the varied nature of Still's writing requires a similarly
flexible analytical attitude. I hope that the analysis will illustrate
how comprehensively Still's music engages with different aesthetics and
how successfully they blend into a coherent and rewarding musical
experience.

Returning to Example 1, let us consider the large-scale narrative
structure of the work. The introduction provides the foundation for the
movement as a whole. Its D major--B minor tonality, pentatonic motives,
and consistent quarter-note and later eighth-note motion become
omnipresent features of the whole piece. The exposition separates the
three motives and shapes them into contrasting thematic areas that are
defined by the predominance of common-practice, modernist, or
African-American techniques. The first subject---with its pentatonic
melody, syncopations, harmonic parallelism, and functional
harmony---contains primarily common-practice tonal and African-American
elements. The second subject is much more chromatic, exhibits
polytonality and non-functional chord progressions, and contains a high
degree of orchestral stratification with little doubling.

The development further striates the stylistic elements and explores
them more independently of one another and in new combinations. The
development also introduces new thematic ideas and pitch relationships,
emphasizing primarily the new role of a tritone. Its climax attains a
negativity in which the movement achieves its thickest, loudest, most
motivically saturated moment but is marked as a problem by virtue of its
minor mode and the presence of melodic and harmonic dissonances that
demands resolution in the recapitulation and coda. Still's solution, as
we shall see, is to *increase* the influence each musical style and
theme has on the others, so that the dissonant tritone material from the
development supports progressions in what was formerly a mostly diatonic
first subject and transition, while the polytonality of the second
subject is largely ironed out. The coda brings all the instrumental
families together for a massive *tutti* whose D-major superimposition of
themes and syncopated *ostinati* answers the development's D-minor
climax optimistically.

<h3>b) First Subject and Transition</h3>

{% include center_column_img.html src='assets/articles/hier/img/ex_3.png' img_size='100' fig_num='3' fig_caption='Still, Symphony No. 4, mm. 9--17. Piano reduction of the first subject.'%}

[Example 3](#ex-3) provides a piano reduction of the first
subject, mm. 9--17, and annotates its form and harmony. While the theme
is in most respects a conventional period, its harmonic language---
which is tonal-functional, adhering closely to the Riemannian cadence
*T--S--D--T*---introduces some subtle dissonances that will develop
further in the second subject and development section. The example
labels the harmonies from a functional perspective---the presence of
more complex chords makes applying simple Roman numerals more difficult,
though not impossible. The antecedent phrase ends with a iii<sup>7</sup> chord
that functions as a varied dominant in D major, and the opening vi chord
stands in for the tonic. Dissonant sonorities often precede the more
readily identifiable functional ones. Still produces dissonant harmonies
by preceding most consonant chords with sonorities formed by incomplete
chromatic neighbor tones and emphasizes the dissonances by placing them
in strong metrical positions. The sonority that precedes the B-minor
triad on the second eighth note of beat 1 contains {C, D<span style="font-family: music;">&#x266F;</span>, E<span style="font-family: music;">&#x266F;</span>, G, A, D}.
The meaning of the sonority is clarified through the stepwise resolution
of its literal and implied voice leading: C--B, D<span style="font-family: music;">&#x266F;</span>--D, E<span style="font-family: music;">&#x266F;</span>--F<span style="font-family: music;">&#x266F;</span>, G--F<span style="font-family: music;">&#x266F;</span>,
and A--B. The first and last pairs of pitches listed together suggest a
Phrygian cadence, which is replicated halfway through m. 10, now applied
to a D-major triad, and at the beginning of m. 13, now applied to a
F<span style="font-family: music;">&#x266F;</span>-minor seventh chord. While such stepwise displacements of more
concordant sonorities are hardly new, the discordant sonorities formed
by them introduce a piquant harmonic twist that enriches the otherwise
diatonic harmony, while also providing fodder for the more dissonant,
strident development section (discussed below).{% include footnote.html footnote_number='10' footnote_text=footnote_10%} The dissonant
neighbors also recall common features of African-American voice leading.
According to Burton Peretti, stepwise voice leading has been common in
African-American music since the nineteenth century. It was inherited
from "African and Caribbean musical qualities such as pentatonic scales
and melismatic sliding between notes" (2009, 25). The music thus
combines classical phrase structure, pentatonicism, functional harmony,
dissonance, and melismatic inner voice leading.

The consequent phrase enrichens the dissonance further. The dissonant
dominant function is expanded into m. 13 and tonic only returns solidly
at the end of m. 14. Measure 14 introduces functional mixtures that
anticipate the polytonality of the second subject: the downbeat of the
measure contains C<span style="font-family: music;">&#x266F;</span><sup>7</sup> (*D*) with an added E-natural in the melody,
producing a combination of major and minor qualities. The dissonant
second eighth note does not lead to a more consonant chord but to
another dissonance: the diminished third {D<span style="font-family: music;">&#x266F;</span>, F} resolves implicitly to
E, dovetailing with the resolution of {A<span style="font-family: music;">&#x266F;</span>, C} to B that follows, shown
by the dashed lines in the example. The combination of a pentatonic
melody with chromatic voice leading and dissonant harmony establishes
the pluralistic nature of Still's style.

{% include center_column_img.html src='assets/articles/hier/img/ex_4.png' img_size='100' fig_num='4' fig_caption='Still, Symphony No. 4, mm. 9--17. Rhythmic displacement in the first subject.'%}

The first subject also combines the metrical squareness of the classical
period with rousing syncopations associated with jazz. [Example 4](#ex-4) provides a rhythmic analysis of the syncopations. The
second eighth note in m. 9 enters "early" anticipating beat 2 of the
measure and has the effect of a double syncopation since the stress
given to beat 2 displaces the metrical accent by a beat and the eighth
note anticipation *itself* displaces the stress. The second measure is a
loose rhythmic retrograde of the first: half--quarter--eighth--eighth in
m. 1 becomes eighth--eighth--quarter--half (where the half is shortened
to a quarter to normalize the rhythm in m. 3) in m. 2. Measure 2 thus
also contains two levels of rhythmic displacement, since beat 3 is
stressed more than beat 1 and is also anticipated by an eighth note. My
rather sterile recomposition illustrates how much interest the
syncopation brings to the melody: the syncopation "signifies" what would
otherwise be a hymn-like classical period.

One immediately noticeable quality of the piece is its *perpetuum
mobile* of steady eighths, often supplied by the background winds. The
movement's steady rhythm---with its evocation of tireless industry, the
steady flow of people and machines across the land---combines within it
the syncopations of African-American music and the more rigid harmonic
rhythm of European art music. There is nary a moment in the movement
when some instrument is not chugging along, ensuring the piece's forward
momentum. Still's use of African-American thematic and rhythmic
materials in the service of European form might elicit worry or surprise
if we accept this interpretation. Combined with the piece's sunny,
D-major disposition, the *perpetuum mobile* is undoubtedly meant to
convey positivity belying the darker side of sprawling industry. But the
upbeat, *Time Forward!­-*like momentum of the piece must surely have been
conscious: Still rejected both the aesthetics of avant-garde music and
what he perceived to be the darker, confrontational role given to
politics by some artists of his time.{% include footnote.html footnote_number='11' footnote_text=footnote_11%} Still's optimism stands in
contrast to more pessimistic strains of thoughts current today, and
though we might hear in Still's music vestiges of oppression, he quite
clearly intended his composition to look forward to a more universal
harmony. I will consider the success of Still's project in the
conclusion below.

From the point of view of form, the first subject owes much to European
art music. Its thematic conventionality, symmetry, limited thematic
materials, and tonal stability make it what William Caplin (1998) calls
"tight-knit." Its formal stability will contrast with the instability of
later thematic sections. The sole presence of strings imbues the passage
with an intimacy and timbral homogeneity that effectively introduce the
piece while leaving open the possibility for greater development and
larger gestures to follow.

<h3>c) Second Subject</h3>

{% include center_column_img.html src='assets/articles/hier/img/ex_5.png' img_size='100' fig_num='5' fig_caption='Still, Symphony No. 4, mm. 25--57. Piano reduction of the second subject.'%}

The second subject contrasts substantially with the first in its
harmony, tonality, degree of formal stability, and orchestration.
[Example 5](#ex-5) provides a piano reduction of the second
subject. The theme is an extended compound sentence, in keeping with the
typically looser construction of second subjects. Still states the
initial compound basic idea four times before fragmenting it and leading
it to a final cadence in D minor. The theme is loosened by virtue of
these repetitions, thematic extensions, and its auxiliary progression
(since the theme lacks a convincing initial tonic or else modulates from
E<span style="font-family: music;">&#x266D;</span> to D). The cadence in the parallel mode of the home key is unusual,
since the second subject normally brings tonal contrast, but the
dissonant polytonal harmonies and the sequential underlying motion from
G major and G minor over E<span style="font-family: music;">&#x266D;</span> in mm. 25--32 to C<span style="font-family: music;">&#x266D;</span> major and B minor over G
in mm. 49--52 bring sufficient contrast to the exposition.

{% include center_column_img.html src='assets/articles/hier/img/ex_6.png' img_size='100' fig_num='6' fig_caption='Still, Symphony No. 4, mm. 25--57. Transformational analysis of the second subject'%}

The entirety of the second subject is founded upon a major thirds
sequence. [Example 6](#ex-6) provides a brief transformational
analysis of the second subject, emphasizing the sequential repetitions
of the bassline motion and the chord progressions in the upper voices.
The melodic chords outlined in the passage progress from G major in m.
25, to G minor in m. 29 (the neo-Riemannian "parallel" transformation),
to G<span style="font-family: music;">&#x266D;</span> major in m. 45 (the neo-Riemannian "slide" transformation).{% include footnote.html footnote_number='12' footnote_text=footnote_12%}
The entire progression repeats under transformation T<sub>4</sub> in mm. 49­--53.
The bass follows the upper voices by rising four semitones from E<span style="font-family: music;">&#x266D;</span> in m.
25 to G in m. 49, preserving the dissonant, polytonal (0148) sonority:
{E<span style="font-family: music;">&#x266D;</span>, G, B, D} becomes {G, C<span style="font-family: music;">&#x266D;</span>, E<span style="font-family: music;">&#x266D;</span>, G<span style="font-family: music;">&#x266D;</span>}.{% include footnote.html footnote_number='13' footnote_text=footnote_13%} But the bass also contains
its own T<sub>7</sub> sequence: bass motion E<span style="font-family: music;">&#x266D;</span>--G in mm. 25--49 is then repeated
B<span style="font-family: music;">&#x266D;</span>--D from mm. 53--57: a "composing-out" of the E<span style="font-family: music;">&#x266D;</span> major seventh
sonority sustained in mm. 29--32. The bass's underlying T<sub>7</sub>
transformation is independent of the upper voices, reinforcing the
polytonal textural dimension. On a large-scale tonal level, the
progression serves to expand the subdominant function in D major/minor,
but it also operates according to its own transformational or sequential
logic. In contrast to the first subject, which was governed primarily by
tonal-functional relationships, the second subject is more immediately
concerned with a transformational logic common to many twentieth-century
styles.

{% include center_column_img.html src='assets/articles/hier/img/ex_7.png' img_size='100' fig_num='7' fig_caption='Still, Symphony No. 4, mm. 25--32. Functional analysis and harmonic dissonance in the second subject'%}

A reduction of the harmony in the first eight measures of the second
subject is provided in [Example 7](#ex-7). On a local level,
the sonorities that arise throughout the passage are polytonal in that
they are stratified registrally to form pairs of tertian sonorities and
diatonic melodic fragments: G major against E<span style="font-family: music;">&#x266D;</span> in m. 25, followed by F
major against A<span style="font-family: music;">&#x266D;</span> major on the downbeats of mm. 26 and 27, etc. The
reduction provides a tonal functional analysis of the progressions in
both keys and then sounding together: the result of the polyphonic
combination is a succession of functional mixtures in the key of E<span style="font-family: music;">&#x266D;</span>
major, though since G major sounds prominently above, one might also
hear the progression primarily in G. The harmonic logic of the passage
is largely linear in that the specific verticalities result from
combination of melodic lines: the contour of the soprano's melody in mm.
25--27 (D--C--D--C--A--C--D) is inverted by the bass
(E<span style="font-family: music;">&#x266D;</span>--A<span style="font-family: music;">&#x266D;</span>--E<span style="font-family: music;">&#x266D;</span>--A<span style="font-family: music;">&#x266D;</span>--C<span style="font-family: music;">&#x266D;</span>--A<span style="font-family: music;">&#x266D;</span>--E<span style="font-family: music;">&#x266D;</span>). The soprano line is the chordal fifth of a
series of parallel major triads, while the bass line supports a series
of parallel perfect fifths. Together, the harmonic sonority is
dissonant.

Overall, the passage tends toward consonance as illustrated by the
chords' interval vectors. Each four-measure phrase is bookended by
chords with prominent thirds and fifths. Intermediary chords contain
higher numbers of semitones, whole tones, and tritones. The change in
mm. 29--32 from G major to G minor in the upper voices reduces the
number of semitones and increases the prominence of fifths. Later
portions of the second subject mostly contain conventional seventh
chords: the sustained E half-diminished seventh chord in mm. 33--44, the
G<span style="font-family: music;">&#x266D;</span> dominant seventh chord in mm. 45--48, etc. But the striking
cross-relation of G/G<span style="font-family: music;">&#x266D;</span> in mm. 49--52 and the major chords in m. 50 that
lie a semitone away from each other---D against D<span style="font-family: music;">&#x266D;</span> in m. 50.2 and B
against B<span style="font-family: music;">&#x266D;</span> in m. 50.4---restore the earlier dissonances heard at the
beginning of the second subject.

Still structures the second subject around numerous logics: tonal
functions, sequential repetitions (transformations), progression from
intervallic dissonance to consonance, and loose melodic inversion. The
combination of structuring principles reflects multiple musical
influences: the planing of African practice, the polytonality and
inversional relationships of modernist styles, and the tonal
prolongation of the subdominant in D minor. But since the passage ends
in the global tonic's parallel minor, it is marked as unsatisfactory; it
is as if the idealized, autochthonous music Still is grasping for will
require further dissection and reassembly before it achieves the right
proportions, and where better to experiment than in the development?

<h3>d) Development</h3>

The development section is formally complex: it separates and recombines
material in a way typical of classical developments but also bears the
extra meaning resulting from Still's pluralistic combination of styles.
The form chart in Example 1 documents what James Hepokoski and Warren
Darcy (2006, 611) describe as a "rotational structure," which
"extend\[s\] through musical space by recycling one or more times---with
appropriate alterations and adjustments---a referential thematic pattern
established as an ordered succession at the piece's outset"---in this
case, the development's outset. Sections labeled A, which contain
motivic fragments drawn from the second subject, alternate with those
labeled B, which contain reworkings of the first subject's theme. While
the A sections remain mostly in D major/minor, the B sections explore
key areas remote from the global tonic, including C<span style="font-family: music;">&#x266F;</span> minor and G<span style="font-family: music;">&#x266F;</span> minor.
The A sections also have a preparatory character because they contain
short fragments that precede fuller statements of thematic material more
completely drawn from the exposition.

[Examples 8](#ex_8) and [9](#ex_9) provide piano reductions of the A
sections, and [Examples 10--12](#ex_10) provide piano reductions
of the B sections. The A sections are unified through the emphasis on a
new recurring, bustling accompanimental figure that often outlines a
half-diminished seventh chord. Gradually, the A sections introduce more
new rhythmic figures that are motivically related to the opening motto,
including new syncopations and diminutions of the motto in sixteenth
notes. The B sections recast the first subject in the minor mode while
fragmenting and reworking it harmonically. As the music progresses, it
becomes darker, thicker, and more dissonant until a D-minor climax
recedes and prepares the onset of the recapitulation with a dominant.

{% include center_column_img.html src='assets/articles/hier/img/ex_8.png' img_size='100' fig_num='8' fig_caption='Still, Symphony No. 4, mm. 57--64. Piano reduction of development rotation A1.'%}

<h3>i)  A Sections</h3>

The A sections gradually become more complex. The first rotation,
provided in Example 8, contains an eight-measure compound basic idea
followed by another compound basic idea. This passage draws primarily on
a new scale related to the common blues scales, D--E--F--G<span style="font-family: music;">&#x266F;</span>/A<span style="font-family: music;">&#x266D;</span>
--A--B<span style="font-family: music;">&#x266D;</span>--C<span style="font-family: music;">&#x266F;</span>, whose tritone G<span style="font-family: music;">&#x266F;</span> above the tonic introduces a dissonance
that will characterize the darker development section as a whole and
which will be developed in further rotations of the A sections (see
below).{% include footnote.html footnote_number='14' footnote_text=footnote_14%} Harmonies arise from the mostly stepwise parallel motion of
multiple voices through the scale, though oblique motion against a
repeated D pedal arise frequently, too. It is interesting that Still
contrasts a blues-like scale in the development section with the more
diatonic and major-pentatonic scales of the exposition. The blues scale,
long considered to be a mixture of received African scales and Western
diatonic scales, provides both a new color but also evokes, perhaps, a
potential musical problem that will require resolution in the
recapitulation and coda: how to balance and blend European and African
traditions.{% include footnote.html footnote_number='15' footnote_text=footnote_15%}

The second rotation of the A section, provided in Example 9, contains
the same bustling accompaniment but introduces a new syncopated idea in
mm. 77--79 derived from the F minor pentatonic collection. The passage
is then harmonically sequenced up a minor third in mm. 81--83,
contributing to a mild core-like effect. The music then fragments the
idea while sustaining an E<span style="font-family: music;">&#x266D;</span>-dominant seventh chord that at first sounds
like a tonic with a lowered seventh before it functions as the
enharmonic dominant in G<span style="font-family: music;">&#x266F;</span> minor, which arrives in the following passage
(rotation B2). One of the more distinctive features of the passage is
the alternation of different instrumental families: low strings in mm.
75--76, brass with pizzicato strings in mm. 77--84, winds and harp in
mm. 85--86, strings in mm. 87--88, and so on. The avoidance of doublings
between families produces a thinner sound but also differentiates the
development from the exposition: the spotlight thrown onto the different
families mirrors the intensified application of one of the three
stylistic elements---the bluesy quality of rotation A1 compared to the
more modernist dissonances in A2, etc. The development section isolates
these elements slightly before allowing them to join together in the
recapitulation and coda (see below).

{% include center_column_img.html src='assets/articles/hier/img/ex_9.png' img_size='100' fig_num='9' fig_caption='Still, Symphony No. 4, mm. 75--91. Piano reduction of development rotation A2.'%}

<h3>ii) B Sections</h3>

The B sections draw primarily on first-subject material, but instead of
presenting the entirety of the theme's period, the B sections fragment
the theme. The first rotation of the B section, B1, is provided in
[Example 10](#ex_10). Still transforms the subject from a period into an extended
sentence, loosening the structure---a relatively simple alteration that
prepares the more complex ones to follow.

{% include center_column_img.html src='assets/articles/hier/img/ex_10.png' img_size='100' fig_num='10' fig_caption='Still, Symphony No. 4, mm. 65--75. Piano reduction of development rotation B1.'%}

{% include center_column_img.html src='assets/articles/hier/img/ex_11.png' img_size='100' fig_num='11' fig_caption='Still, Symphony No. 4, mm. 97--104. Rhythm and harmony in development rotation B2.'%}

[Example 11](#ex_11) provides the second rotation of the B section, B2, which
contains five layers: the first violins, the violas, the bassoon, the
cellos, and the trombones and tubas. In the first layer, the violins
play fragments from the first subject with the syncopations discussed
above, resulting in one of the piece's few grouping dissonances in mm.
103--104. The four-eighth-note figure in m. 103 is repeated but extended
by two eighths into m. 104, after which it fragments into two
three-eighth units. The additive and subtractive rhythm contributes to
the developmental nature of the passage: Still plays with the lengths of
the theme's units departing from the exposition's consistent
four-measure phrasing. The chordal attacks in the brass emphasize the
beat while the violas emphasize the third and sixth eighths of the
measure and the bassoons occasionally enter to emphasize beat 2. More
subtly, the cello's low G<span style="font-family: music;">&#x266F;</span>s in the first six measures provide a hint of
syncopation since, as the lowest pitches of their line, they do not
occur on strong metrical positions. The sophisticated layering of
different *ostinati* creates a complex rhythmic fabric that recalls the
circular cross-rhythms of sub-Saharan music and its influence on
American music.{% include footnote.html footnote_number='16' footnote_text=footnote_16%}

Still combines melodic features of the first subject with harmonic
features of the second in rotation B2. The first subject's theme returns
recognizably in the minor mode, but the accompaniment punctuates it with
new harmonic support. In mm. 97--98, Still introduces whole-tone chords
on beat 4 that function locally as *D* of *D* (a varied augmented sixth
chord). The basslines in these two measures, with its emphasis on
G<span style="font-family: music;">&#x266F;</span>--E--C, recalls the T<sub>4</sub> transformations of the second subject. Still
intensifies the harmonic dissonance in mm. 100--102: an F-major chord
follows the G<span style="font-family: music;">&#x266F;</span>-minor chord in m.100, and a D-major-seventh chord follows
the G<span style="font-family: music;">&#x266F;</span>-minor chord in mm.101--102. The bassline motion now outlines a
loose T<sub>3</sub> progression, G<span style="font-family: music;">&#x266F;</span>--F--D, and the tritone, G<span style="font-family: music;">&#x266F;</span>--D, will come to
have a growing role in the development that follows. The combination of
these materials serves to problematize the first subject material: will
the first subject withstand the dissonances and sequences of the second
subject, and can the two subjects coexist?

{% include center_column_img.html src='assets/articles/hier/img/ex_12.png' img_size='100' fig_num='12' fig_caption='Still, Symphony No. 4, mm. 113--132. Piano reduction of development rotation B3.'%}

The third rotation of the development's B section, provided in [Example 12](#ex_12), includes some of the most dissonant harmony and extended process of
fragmentation in the whole movement. After the initial statement of the
first subject's presentation in C<span style="font-family: music;">&#x266F;</span> minor in mm. 113--116, to which a
lament-bass-like countermelody is added in the cellos, Still fragments
the theme's basic idea for twelve measures. The continuation phrase
passes from a C<span style="font-family: music;">&#x266F;</span>-minor chord with added A<span style="font-family: music;">&#x266F;</span>, {C<span style="font-family: music;">&#x266F;</span>, E, G<span style="font-family: music;">&#x266F;</span>, A<span style="font-family: music;">&#x266F;</span>}, to a
whole-tone chord, {B<span style="font-family: music;">&#x266F;</span>/C, E, G<span style="font-family: music;">&#x266F;</span>, A<span style="font-family: music;">&#x266F;</span>, D}, to a C-dominant-ninth chord, {C,
E, G, B<span style="font-family: music;">&#x266D;</span>, D}, to a combination of A-dominant-seventh chord with added C
and E<span style="font-family: music;">&#x266D;</span> in the violins, {C<span style="font-family: music;">&#x266F;</span>, E, G, A, C, E<span style="font-family: music;">&#x266D;</span>}---which could be read as a
combination of A7 and A half-diminished, or A<sup><span style="font-family: music;">&#x266F;</span>9<span style="font-family: music;">&#x266D;</span>5</sup>, a chord common to
the world of jazz. [Example 13](#ex-13) provides a reduction of
the harmony in the continuation phrase. The gradual semitone voice
leading indicated by the solid arrows echoes at a much slower pace the
semitone voice leading of the harmony in the first subject. While in the
first subject, the chromatic voice leading ultimately supported a
functional progression in D major, in the development, the passage
serves to modulate from C<span style="font-family: music;">&#x266F;</span> minor to D minor and culminates in a
sustained, dissonant sonority.

{% include center_column_img.html src='assets/articles/hier/img/ex_13.png' img_size='100' fig_num='13' fig_caption='Still, Symphony No. 4, mm. 117--128. Harmonic reduction of example 12.'%}

The development's climax in mm. 129--136 combine the first and second
subject together with the bustling eighth note figure that characterizes
the A rotations of the development. The contrapuntal sophistication of
the passages contrasts with the breezier homophony of the exposition.
The harmonic motion is also non-diatonic, moving from a D-minor chord in
m. 129 to an F-minor-seventh chord in m. 130, to a combination of A<span style="font-family: music;">&#x266D;</span> and
F-major chords on beat 4 of the same measure. Taken all together the
themes returning in the minor mode, the non-diatonic harmony, the
presence of the tritone melodically and in the dissonant combination of
F major with A<span style="font-family: music;">&#x266D;</span> major, and the thick, loud *tutti­*-like texture
establish the passage as the problematic crux of the movement that the
recapitulation will solve.{% include footnote.html footnote_number='17' footnote_text=footnote_17%}

The development section as a whole is unified not just through the
presence of repeating accompaniment figures and expository materials,
but also through the tritone, both as an interval within a chord and as
a melodic interval. The discordant interval makes increasing appearances
with each rotation of the A section. Its initial appearance in the
bassline in m. 59 (Example 8) is dwarfed by its emphasis in the
half-diminished chords in mm. 77--79 (Example 9) that move by minor
third, D half-diminished to F half-diminished, and in the bustling
accompaniment figures in the lower instruments in the measures that
follow: A<span style="font-family: music;">&#x266D;</span>--F--D, etc., which outlines a tritone. In m. 87,
juxtapositions of chords separated by tritone when respelled first
appear: {A, C<span style="font-family: music;">&#x266F;</span>, E} with added B<span style="font-family: music;">&#x266D;</span> resolves to {E<span style="font-family: music;">&#x266D;</span>, G, B<span style="font-family: music;">&#x266D;</span>, D<span style="font-family: music;">&#x266D;</span>, F}. At
first, the two chords function as dominant of the B section's G<span style="font-family: music;">&#x266F;</span> minor
in m. 97 (Example 11), but when the combination of an A-major chord with
the pitch E<span style="font-family: music;">&#x266D;</span> reappears in mm. 125--128, the chord functions as dominant
of the next B rotation's D minor tonality, beginning in m. 129. The
tonal scheme of the development section itself thus follows a tritone
transposition: it begins in D minor in mm. 57--65, proceeds to G<span style="font-family: music;">&#x266F;</span> minor
in mm. 97--104, and culminates with D minor in mm. 129--144: a loose
"composing-out" of the D--G<span style="font-family: music;">&#x266F;</span> tritone introduced in the development's
allusion to the blues scale. Once the climactic section begins in m.
129, local progressions with roots separated by a tritone come to
dominate the harmony: D minor to A<span style="font-family: music;">&#x266D;</span> major and back in m. 129 (the
progression is repeated several times); D<span style="font-family: music;">&#x266D;</span> major seventh to G dominant
seventh in m. 139; D minor to A<span style="font-family: music;">&#x266D;</span> major with added sixth in m. 142, etc.
The dissonances produced by the progressions and superimpositions recall
and develop the polytonal combinations of the second subject while also
introducing an element of conflict common to the rhetoric of the
classical development section.

<h3>e) Recapitulation</h3>

The recapitulation synthesizes the contradictions of the development
section. Still achieves an optimistic synthesis by combining the
elements together harmoniously and by limiting the scope of the
dissonance found in the exposition and development. The first subject
eschews the semitone voice leading of the exposition, and the melody is
given to the flute with rich doublings and countermelodies in the winds
and strings followed by a second statement in the strings with
accompaniment in the strings, harp, and celesta. The short transition
from mm. 169--174 re-introduces chord progressions by tritone and minor
third: D major alternates with F minor and F major in quick succession.

{% include center_column_img.html src='assets/articles/hier/img/ex_14.png' img_size='100' fig_num='14' fig_caption='Still, Symphony No. 4, mm. 175--181. Piano reduction of the recapitulation\'s second subject.'%}

[Example 14](#ex-14) provides a reduction of the recapitulation
of the second subject. Still synthesizes harmonic elements from the
exposition's first and second subjects and from the development. The
passage is in the key of D major, the global tonic. Its harmonies
function tonally within D major, but extra weight is given to the
subdominant---a common feature of recapitulations and codas in sonata
form---by including Phrygian cadences and an emphasis on the flat side
of D major: <span style="font-family: music;">&#x266D;</span>VI, <span style="font-family: music;">&#x266D;</span>III, and <span style="font-family: music;">&#x266D;</span>II. The chord progressions also recall the
movement by third that characterized the harmony of the second subject
in the exposition. Finally, the progression F<span style="font-family: music;">&#x266F;</span>-minor seventh to C-minor
seventh in mm. 2 and 3 and again in mm. 6 and 7 show the influence of
the tritone progression that came to dominate the development section.
By bringing each element---the global tonic, the non-functional triadic
progressions, and the tritone---into a cohesive whole, Still provides a
nearly conclusive solution to the problem posed by their conflict
earlier in the piece. Still reserves the final, incontrovertible cadence
for the coda.

{% include center_column_img.html src='assets/articles/hier/img/ex_15.png' img_size='100' fig_num='15' fig_caption='Still, Symphony No. 4, mm. 183--190. Piano reduction of the coda.'%}

<h3>f) Coda</h3>

The coda, as shown in [Example 15](#ex-15), resolves many of the
conflicting stylistic impulses established earlier in the piece left
unresolved by the recapitulation: the conflict between diatonic and
chromatic harmony, rhythmic stability and syncopation, and orchestral
stratification and blending. A final I--vi--IV--ii--V--I progression
solidifies the D-major tonic and recalls Caplin's (2021) "iconic
cadence"---a tonally normative and rhetorically emphasized cadence that
sometimes ironically evokes the definitiveness of cadences from earlier
repertories in late-romantic and early modern music in which such
cadences more rarely arise. (I will return to the discussion of this
cadence in the next section.) The bass in mm. 183--190 moves entirely on
the beat, and the harmonic rhythm quickens in mm. 187--188. The brass
instruments, which had been emphasizing beats 2 and 3, liquidate to a
simpler, steady quarter note pulse in mm. 188--189. The violins
similarly cease their syncopated quarters in m. 189. The ensemble has
seemingly liquidated to steady eighths and quarters in the final
measure, but the piece surprisingly ends on the weak fourth quarter of
the measure, and the violins play one last syncopated rhythm, evoking
the first subject. Like the second subject, which combined harmonic
elements from the piece's different sections and stylistic sources, the
coda smooths out the syncopations in order to signal the approaching
formal closure, but it ultimately gives syncopation the last, triumphant
word. The dissonances and polytonality of the second subject are here
erased, and the forward march of the glorious, ringing D major sweeps
past any objections raised by earlier problems.
</section>

<section markdown="1" >

<h2>4. Hermeneutics and Concluding Remarks</h2>

It is a testament to Still's considerable imagination that he so
effortlessly combines musical styles and aesthetics seemingly at odds
with one another. Though the Fourth Symphony prizes simplicity, it is by
no means simplistic: the above analysis highlights the minute details of
the work and demonstrates how Still creates local and large-scale
contrasts in a variety of musical domains in order to construct its
meaning. The atmosphere is one of infectious optimism that unifies
diverse styles and approaches in a pluralistic whole: tonal function
combined with polytonality and pentatonicism; diatonicism with
unconventional chromaticism; classical phrase structure with jazz
rhythms; the dialectics of sonata form with the immutable *perpetuum
mobile* and *ostinato*.

But does the music (too) successfully fuse and anneal, like pieces of
scrap metal into a strengthened whole, diverse musical styles? Is this
music truly "autochthonous"? While Still does include modernist and
African-American elements in the symphony, it is clearly weighted in
favor of European art-music practices. Smith argues that "Still composed
(for whatever reason) conservative, less dissonant music and was himself
politically conservative." (2000, 200). One might question the degree of
the piece's conservatism, however. Compared to Varèse, Schoenberg, or
Ives, Still's music clearly retains more harmonic and formal features
typical of the common-practice period. But Still's music also
contributed to a return to simplicity that defined not only much
American music of the time, but art as well---for instance, the Urban
and Social Realists of the 1930s who similarly spurned avant-garde
developments in favor of portraying the complexities of American rural
and urban life. Aaron Copland's "imposed simplicity" defined his output
in the 1930s and early '40s (Crist 2005) and Virgil Thomson, whose
return to simplicity in the 1930s coincided with a greater interest in
African-American music making. Like Still's symphony, Lisa Barg
describes Thomson's opera *Four Saints* as "a beguiling map of sonic
memories, a cartography of musical styles encompassing the old and new,
vernacular and cultivated, sacred and secular." (2000, 126). In addition
to its combination of "Baptist hymns, parlor dances, and sentimental
ballads . . . drinking songs, marches, fanfares, and operetta," the
opera also includes portrayals of African-American music. The complexity
of racialization in Thomson's work is fraught but underscores a growing
awareness of the centrality of Black contributions to American musical
culture. A poet friend of Thomson's "liken\[ed\] the effect of Thomson's
music to the healing power of sunlight on the skin, restoring color back
to the lifeless pallor of a European musical body ravaged by the
bloodless scourge of (Germanic?) modernist dissonance." (Barg 2000,
125). Whatever one might think of such an appraisal, it does resonate
with Still's similar rejection of some of the most stringent aspects of
modernism as learned during his study with Varèse and with his desire to
reintroduce to art music a simplicity tinged with African-American
(musical) experience. By the mid-1940s, however, the simpler American
style was changing. Composers whose music belonged squarely to the
tonal-symphonic tradition began increasingly to include new
compositional devices. Roger Sessions's Second Symphony of 1947 retains
the galloping forward momentum of his earlier music, but ladens it with
dissonances and hints of his use of the twelve-tone technique to come.
Howard Hanson's Fourth Symphony of 1943 ---a requiem with modal
materials that recall earlier European music more than living American
folk styles---contains diatonic passages of romantic splendor alongside
intense, dissonant climaxes. Samuel Barber's Second Symphony of 1944
makes use of an electronic tone generator. In this context, Still's
symphony and the solutions his music provides to the problems it
establishes seem perhaps conventional or backward-looking.

Jacqueline DjeDje argues that while the overall aesthetic of the
symphony was conservative for 1947, Still's "fusion of both the
neoromantic and modernist styles...\[reflects\] his desire to integrate
the idioms of other cultures to create a 'universal'" (2011, 20). Djedje
compares Still's desire for universality to Cynthia Kimberlin and Akin
Euba's concept of "intercultural music," which Djedje defines as music
whose "composers, regardless of their ethnic or cultural origin,
integrate elements from two or more cultures" (2). She argues that

> In the midst of Los Angeles's population shifts and ethnic tensions,
> caused in part by restrictive covenants and the economic activity
> surrounding World War II, Still's use of intercultural elements in the
> forties and later was prophetic and significant because this may have
> been his way of proposing solutions to social problems. By embracing
> and integrating musical elements of different ethnic groups (Africans,
> African Americans, American Indians, Latinos), Still was calling for
> interhuman understanding. (2011, 21)

Many of Still's most universalist pieces would follow the Fourth
Symphony: DjeDje lists *Carmela* (1949), *Four Indigenous Portraits*
(1956) and *Minorities and Majorities* (1971) as pieces that make
especial use of pluralist materials. In the Fourth Symphony itself, the
interpenetration of different styles is deep and sincere: there are no
token or stereotypical evocations of folk or jazz idioms in Still's
symphony, rather elements from these sources form part of the symphony's
structure and its manipulation of the material. Passages are imbued with
combinations of elements: syncopation, tonal-functional harmony,
displacements of chords by semitone, and polytonality. Still attempts to
resolve the conflict between autochthony and universalism by appealing
musically to the mythical American "melting pot," in which diverse
experiences and backgrounds fuse into a new alloy. In the Fourth
Symphony, classical form and phrase structure, tonality, polytonality,
freer dissonance handling, harmonic parallelism, jazz rhythm and
harmony, and pentatonicism---a musical pluralism that aims at
universality---combine together in a specifically American way: American
pluralism *as* autochthony.

The result, though, remains somehow sanitized: Still's solution to the
diverse compositional styles that sometimes uncomfortably rub elbows in
the exposition and development is to provide a mostly diatonic
recapitulation and a gigantic, affirmative ii--V--I cadence at the end
of the symphony. The polytonality and rhythmic dissonances explored in
the second subject and development section are treated as problems,
since they lead to the enormous D-minor climax and are subsequently
restrained in the recapitulation, except for brief nods. Still's
symphonic movement addresses modernist techniques but, like a microcosm
of his own career, ultimately rejects them. In so doing, Still seems to
suggest that a euphonious synthesis of the diversity of music and social
experience in the modern world can only be achieved in the idealized
realm of the imagination. In order to create his style, Still relegates
the discords---not just of musical modernism, but of the chaotic,
embattled, at times anarchic world modernism seeks to represent---to a
less prominent position in the piece's structural hierarchy. And the
music of other American cultures---both transplanted and genuinely
native---are conspicuously absent. The symphony's scope is too narrow to
be truly universal, and yet too far removed from the musical roots of
any one tradition to be autochthonous.

Viewed in this way, Still's symphony is not a vision of the world or of
America as it is, but as he imagined it to be. If his quest was to
produce a "universal" music, or a universally accessible American music,
I believe he failed. But if we discard the utopian idealism and consider
the music's technical achievements and compositional subtlety, the
symphony reveals itself to be, beyond well-crafted, a highly
*individual* work and one that is genuinely "autochthonous," in that it
could only have evolved from the catalysis instigated by the mixture of
numerous American influences and the personal expression of Still's
unique compositional genius.
</section>

<section id="works-cited" markdown="1" >
Works Cited

Anku, Willie. 2000. "Circles and Time: A Theory of Structural
Organization of Rhythm in African Music." *Music Theory Online* 6 (1).

Arom, Simha. 1993. *African Polyphony and Polyrhythm: Musical Structure
and Methodology.* Translated by Martin Thom, Barbara Tuckett, and
Raymond Boyd. New York: Cambridge University Press.

Arvey, Verna. 1972. "With His Roots in the Soil." In *William Grant
Still and the Fusion of Cultures in American Music*, edited by Robert
Bartlett Haas, 82--87. Los Angeles: Black Sparrow Press.

Auerbach, Brent. 2021. *Musical Motives: A Theory and Method for
Analyzing Shape in Music.* Oxford: Oxford University Press.

Austin, William. 1966. *Music in the Twentieth Century.* New York:
Norton.

Barg, Lisa. 2000. "Black Voices/White Sounds: Race and Representation in
Virgil Thomson's Four Saints in Three Acts." *American Music* 18 (2):
121--61.

Blok, Josine H. 2009. "Gentrifying Genealogy: On the Genesis of the
Athenian Autochthony Myth." In *Antike Mythe: Medien, Transformationen
und Konstruktionen*, edited by Ueli Dill and Christine Walde, 251--74.
Berlin: Walter de Gruyter.

Botz-Bornstein, Thorsten. 2020. *Micro and Macro Philosophy: Organicism
in Biology, Philosophy, and Politics.* Leiden, Netherlands: Brill.

Caplin, William. 1998. *Classical Form: A Theory of Formal Functions for
the Instrumental Music of Haydn, Mozart, and Beethoven.* New York:
Oxford University Press.

---------. 2021. "The 'Iconic Cadence': A Post-Romantic Case of
Cadential Nostalgia and Irony." EUROMAC 2021, Moscow, Russia.
Unpublished conference paper.

Chodos, Asher. 2018. "The Blues Scale: Historical and Epistemological
Considerations." *Jazz Perspectives* 11 (2): 139--71.

Cohn, Richard. 2012. *Audacious Euphony: Chromatic Harmony and the
Triad's Second Nature*. Oxford: Oxford University Press.

Crist, Elizabeth B. 2005. *Music for the Common Man: Aaron Copland
During the Depression and War*. Oxford: Oxford University Press.

DjeDje, Jacqueline Codgell. 2011. "Context and Creativity: William Grant
Still in Los Angeles." *Black Music Research Journal* 31 (1): 1--27.

Du Bois, W.E.B. 2018 \[1903\]. "Of the Training of Black Men" In *The
Souls of Black Folk*, edited by Patricia H. Hinchey, 71--86*.* Gorham,
ME: Myers.

Edwards, Griffith. 1987. "The Life of William Grant Still." PhD Diss.,
Harvard University.

Haas, Robert Bartlett, ed. 1972. *William Grant Still and the Fusion of
Cultures in American Music*. Los Angeles: Black Sparrow Press.

Heetderks, David J. 2011. "A Tonal Revolution in Fifths and Semitones:
Aaron Copland's Quiet City." *Music Theory Online* 17 (2).

Hepokoski, James and Darcy, Warren. 2006. *Elements of Sonata Theory:
Norms, Types, and Deformations in the Late Eighteenth-Century Sonata.*
New York: Oxford University Press.

Hughes, Langston. 1999 \[1926\]. "The Negro Artist and the Racial
Mountain." In *Keeping Time: Readings in Jazz History*, edited by Robert
Walser, 55--57. New York: Oxford University Press.

Jenkins, Christopher. 2019. "Signifyin(g) within African American
Classical Music: Linking Gates, Hip-Hop, and Perkinson." *The Journal of
Aesthetics and Art Criticism* 77 (4): 391--400.

Kern, Stephen. 2011. *The Modernist Novel: A Critical Introduction.* New
York: Cambridge University Press.

Kubik, Gerhard. 1994. *Theory of African Music, Volume I*. Chicago: The
University Press of Chicago.

Locke, Alain. 1997 \[1925\]. *The New Negro*. New York: Simon & Schuster
Inc.

Murchison, Gayle. 2000. "'Dean of Afro-American Composers' or 'Harlem
Renaissance Man': The New Negro and the Musical Poetics of William Grant
Still." In *William Grant Still: A Study in Contradictions,* edited by
Catherine Parsons Smith, 39--65. Berkeley, CA : University of California
Press.

Neubauer, John. 2009. "Organicism and Music Theory." In *New Paths:
Aspects of Music Theory and Aesthetics in the Age of Romanticism*,
edited by John Neubauer, Janet Schmalfeldt, Scott Burnham, Susan Youens,
and Jim Samson, 11--36. Leuven, Belgium: Leuven University Press.

Oja, Carole. 1992. "'New Music' and the 'New Negro': The Background of
William Grant Still's *Afro-American Symphony*." *Black Music Research
Journal* 12 (2): 145--69.

Oliver, Paul. 1991. "That Certain Feeling: Blues and Jazz . . . in
1890?" *Popular Music* 10 (1): 11--19.

Peretti, Burton. 2009. *Lift Every Voice: The History of African
American Music*. Lanham, MD: Rowman and Littlefield Publishers.

Reti, Rudolph. 1951. *The Thematic Process in Music.* New York:
Macmillan.

Rings, Steven. 2011. *Tonality and Transformation.* Oxford: Oxford
University Press.

Schoenberg, Arnold. 1911. *Harmonielehre*. Vienna: Universal Edition.

Schuller, Gunther. 1968. *Early Jazz: Its Roots and Musical
Development*. Oxford: Oxford University Press.

Smith, Catherine Parsons. 2000. "'Harlem Renaissance Man' Revisited: The
Politics of Race and Class in Still's Late Career." In *William Grant
Still: A Study in Contradictions,* edited Catherine Parsons Smith,
182--212. Berkeley, CA : University of California Press.

Solie, Ruth A. 1980. "The Living Work: Organicism and Musical Analysis."
*19<sup>th</sup>-Century Music* 4 (2): 147--56.

Spencer, Jon Michael, ed. 1992. *The William Grant Still Reader: Essays
on American Music.* Durham, NC: Durham University Press.

Temperley, David. 2021. "The Origins of Syncopation in American Popular
Music." *Popular Music* 40 (1): 18--41.
</section>

